GOOD EVENING, EVERYONE,
WELCOME TO APRIL SEVEN MEETING
IN THE HOURS BEFORE HE TRIES TO
JOIN US FROM THE
CONSERVATIVE
HERE COUNCILOR HARRISON HERE,
COUNCILOR WATSON HERE COMES OUT
HERE CUSTOMER DENHA HERE,
ELSBERG OF THE OTHER HERE.
MAYOR TAYLOR HERE FROM OUR IRE
HERE OVER HERE, BRIGGS HERE
CUSTOMER KORNEL HERE WE HAVE A
QUORUM THE MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA MOVE BY OUR
SECOND FIVE COUNCIL MEMBER
PANEL DISCUSSION OF THE AGENDA
FAVOR FAVOR OPPOSED.
THE AGENDA IS APPROVED.
YOUR COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR NO MAYOR
.
WE HAVE THE PLEASURE OF A
NUMBER OF INTRODUCTIONS TODAY.
FIRST WITH RESPECT TO THE
JUNETEENTH EVENT, OUR LOCAL
BRANCH OF THE NAACP COME ON UP
YOU.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS LYNN LANDI AND
MEMBER OF THE ANN ARBOR BRANCH
OF THE NAACP AND TRI CHAIR
OF THIS YEAR'S CELEBRATION
OF JUNETEENTH AND JUNE 14TH AND
MY OTHER TO THE OTHER TWO LEGS
ITS THREE LEGGED STOOL I
LUCILLE LUCILLE KIRK, MALCOLM
AND MARY ALL TIME.
SO THE THREE OF US ARE LEADING
THE JUNETEENTH CELEBRATION WITH
A GREAT TEAM PEOPLE BEHIND US.
SO WE ARE VERY PLEASED TO BE
WITH YOU THIS EVENING AND TO
SHARE WITH YOU A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT JUNETEENTH AND I
ENCOURAGE YOU TO JOIN IN THIS
CELEBRATION SURPRISE MANY
OF YOU KNOW THIS JUNETEENTH IS
THE NAME GIVEN TO THE DATE JUNE
NINETEENTH IN 1865 WHEN THE
ENSLAVED PEOPLE IN GALVESTON,
TEXAS RECEIVED WORD THE CIVIL
WAR WAS OVER TWO YEARS AFTER
ABRAHAM LINCOLN HAD DONE THE
EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION LONG
TIME FOR WORD TO GET THERE.
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR ON MAY
17TH, 2021 UNANIMOUSLY APPROVED
THAT JUNETEENTH WOULD BE A CITY
HOLIDAY AND LATER TWENTY TWENTY
ONE PRESIDENT BIDEN DECLARED
JUNETEENTH A FEDERAL HOLIDAY.
THE NO BRANCH OF NAACP HAS
OBSERVED JUNETEENTH FOR THIRTY
ONE YEARS THIS IS A COMMUNITY
WIDE CELEBRATION OF FREEDOM AND
A CALL TO CONTINUE TO WORK FOR
SOCIAL JUSTICE.
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR HAS
PARTNERED WITH US PROVIDING
BOTH SUPPORT AND PARTICIPATE.
THE CITY HAS RESERVED WHEELER
PARK ON JUNE 14TH FOR THE SITE
OF JUNETEENTH AND WILL PROVIDE
SECURITY AND FREE PARKING AND
MAYOR CHRIS TAYLOR WILL BE
LEADING THE FREEDOM WALK FROM
FULLER PARK TO WHEELER PARK TO
SET OFF THE CELEBRATION.
WE INVITE YOU ALL TO COME.
THERE WILL BE FOOD, ICE CREAM
TREATS MUSIC, ENTERTAINMENT
GAMES FOR CHILDREN, A CAKEWALK
AND SCHOLARSHIP RECIPIENTS
READING THEIR WINNING ESSAYS
AND OLD FASHIONED COMMUNITY
GATHERING FAIR WITH MODERN
TOUCHES.
THERE ARE ALSO WILL BE MULTIPLE
VENDORS SELLING BEAUTIFUL
HANDCRAFTED JEWELRY AND
CLOTHING AND NONPROFITS WITH
INFORMATION ON THEIR PROGRAMS
AND SERVICES AND ONE OF MY
FAVORITES IS SITTING WITH THE
ELDERS AS THEY VISIT WITH OLD
FRIENDS AND TELL STORIES THE
CITY HAS BEEN GENEROUS IN
SUPPORTING THIS SPECIAL DAY.
WE ASK ONLY ONE MORE THING AND
THAT IS THAT YOU WILL SUPPORT
JUNETEENTH BY PUBLICIZING THIS
EVENT AND THE ANN ARBOR CITY
WEB PAGE AND ANNOUNCING IT AS
THE BIG DRAW DAY BIG DAY
DRAWS
NEAR AND WE HOPE TO SEE YOU AT
WHEELER PARK ON SATURDAY JUNE
14TH FROM NOON TO SIX P.M.
ADMISSION IS FREE TO ALL AND IT
WILL BE A GREAT DAY.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
AND WELL, ANDRE, THIS IS OUR
PRESIDENT ANDRE JOHNSON AND OUR
NEWLY RETIRED PRESIDENT WILLIAM
HAMPTON WHOM YOU ALL KNOW I
THINK I PROMISE I'LL TAKE AS
MUCH TIME AS LYNN I'VE BEEN
INSTRUCTED TO SPEAK ONLY 90
SECONDS SO I'M GOING TO DO THAT
.
I THINK IT IS SIGNIFICANT TO
MENTION THAT THE ANN NAACP
JUNETEENTH IT'S THE SECOND
OLDEST IN THE STATE OF MICHIGAN
SECOND ONLY TO LANSING BY ONE
AND IT'S GOT TO GET BETTER AND
BETTER IF WE MOVE FORWARD
BECAUSE THIS GUY RIGHT HERE,
ANDRE WATSON IS GOING TO BE THE
BEST PRESIDENT IN HISTORY AND
IT'S BEEN NATIONWIDE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR MOST OF YOU KNOW
ME.
GOOD TO SEE YOU ARE AS YOU GUYS
ARE LEARNING I'M SURE IN YOUR
LEADERSHIP POSITION AS OUR
DEMOCRACY GOES THROUGH THE
SHAKES AND RATTLES THAT THEY'RE
GOING THROUGH SOMETIMES A JOB
FINDS YOU WHEN YOU'RE NOT
LOOKING BUT I AM LOOKING
FORWARD TO, YOU KNOW,
SUPPORTING NAACP IN THE
COMMUNITY AND AS LYNN
MENTIONED, WE HOPE THAT YOU ALL
COME OUT.
WE'RE VERY EXCITED ABOUT
JUNETEENTH AND THE CELEBRATION
AND I THINK AND I PRAY THAT
WE'VE ALL LEARNED THE LESSONS
OF BEING PASSIVE ABOUT
OPPORTUNITIES TO CREATE
COMMUNITY BEING ACTIVE, COME
OUT AND LEARN BEING A PART
PRACTICING THE DEMOCRACY THAT
MAY BE CHALLENGED NOW AND I
HOPE EVERYBODY IS REALLY
ENERGIZED AND NOT JUST YOU ALL
ITS LEADERS BUT DEFINITELY YOU
ALL THIS LEADERS BUT EVERYDAY
CITIZENS COME OUT AND DISPLAY
IT IN ARBOR'S ABOUT AND I HOPE
AND PRAY THAT THE ANXIETIES
THAT MOST OF US ARE
EXPERIENCING NOW CAN BE
PROCESSED THROUGH WITH REAL
PRACTICE.
I LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING WITH
YOU.
OH THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
OUR NEXT THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
OUR NEXT INTRODUCTION IS FROM
THE INDOMITABLE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT THROUGH STARTUP.
>> THANK YOU AND I APPRECIATE
THE OPPORTUNITY OF BRINGING YOU
ALL MY MARCH PRESENTATION THIS
EVENING SO THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> SO NEXT THURSDAY DEDé HAS A
WORK SESSION WITH CITY COUNCIL
WHERE WE WILL BE DISCUSSING OUR
NEW DEVELOPMENT PLAN
SPECIFICALLY WHAT WE'RE GOING
TO BE LOOKING FOR FROM COUNCIL
IS DIRECTION WE WILL BE
BRINGING YOU RECOMMENDATIONS
INS ON OUR BOUNDARY.
WE'LL BE BRINGING YOU
RECOMMENDATIONS ON OUR TIFE
CAPTURE WHICH IN TURN WILL
INFLUENCE THE PROJECTS AND THE
POTENTIAL PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS
THAT WE CAN TAKE ON IN THIS
LONG RANGE PLAN.
SO JUST A STEP BACK DENHA WE
STARTED WORK ON THIS
DEVELOPMENT PLAN BACK IN THE
SUMMER OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE
AND WE STARTED BY DOING PEER
RESEARCH AND HAVING A LOT
OF CONVERSATIONS WITH OUR
COLLEAGUES AT THE CITY.
WE TOOK TWENTY TWENTY FOUR THE
FOCUS THERE WAS ON THE MULTIPLE
PLANNING EFFORTS THAT WERE
UNDERWAY IN OUR DOWNTOWN SOME
OF WHICH ARE STILL UNDERWAY AND
ALSO DOING PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
SO HERE WE ARE IN TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE THE FOUNDATION OF OUR PLAN
IS COMPLETE AND WE NOW NEED
DIRECTION FROM COUNCIL TO BRING
YOU A PLAN FOR CONSIDERATION IN
AUGUST THAT YOU ARE COMFORTABLE
WITH.
>> SO OUR BOUNDARY DETERMINES
WHERE WE CAN DO OUR WORK.
OUR FINANCE PLAN ESTIMATES THE
REVENUE WHICH TELLS US HOW MUCH
MONEY WE HAVE TO DO THAT WORK
WHICH IN TURN INFORMS THOSE
PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS.
SO TYPICALLY THIS EQUATION
WOULD WORK BOUNDARY PLUS
REVENUE GIVES US CAPACITY,
GIVES US OUR PROJECTS AND
PROGRAMS.
HOWEVER, IN THIS CASE THAT
EQUATION MAY WORK IN REVERSE
WHERE SOME OF THE PROJECTS AND
PROGRAMS THAT WE SHARE WITH YOU
NEXT THURSDAY MAY DRIVE YOUR
DECISION ON OUR BOUNDARY AND
OUR TIF CAPTURE.
SO WE'LL START WITH BOUNDRY.
I KNOW I'VE SHARED A SLIDE
PREVIOUSLY BUT I THOUGHT IT IS
WORTH REPEATING ON THE LEFT
THAT IS THE DA'S BOUNDARY.
IT IS SIXTY SEVEN BLOCKS OF OUR
DOWNTOWN.
IT WAS ESTABLISHED OVER FORTY
THREE YEARS AGO.
IT HAS NEVER CHANGED HERE IN
ANN ARBOR.
IT IS JUST NOT COMMON FOR US TO
TALK ABOUT OUR DEVAH EXPANDING
IT IS MORE COMMON IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES AND WE CAN LOOK TO
GRAND RAPIDS AS A GREAT EXAMPLE
OF A DIVA THAT HAS EXPANDED 16
TIMES SINCE NINETEEN EIGHTY.
>> BASICALLY THEY'RE RESPONDING
TO AN EVOLVING DOWNTOWN.
SO WHAT WOULD AN OUTCOME BE FOR
THE ANN ARBOR DEDE'S BOUNDARY
TO EXPAND?
BASICALLY IT SPANS THE AREA
WHERE WE CAN WORK AND IT GIVES
US THE OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND
TO A DOWNTOWN THAT WE KNOW IS
EVOLVING.
>> SO WE BEGAN THE LOOKING AT
OUR BOUNDARY WITH A BROAD LENS
KEEPING IN MIND THAT OUR
BOUNDARY HAS TO BE CONTIGUOUS.
SO WE BEGAN BY LOOKING AT
DEVELOPMENT THAT IS ALREADY
HAPPENING JUST ADJACENT TO OUR
CURRENT BORDERS AND THAT BRINGS
ADDITIONAL AMENITY NEEDS.
WE LOOKED AT POTENTIAL PROJECTS
THAT EXPAND BEYOND OUR CURRENT
BOUNDARIES.
WE LOOKED AT UNDERGROUND
UTILITY NEEDS AND WE LOOKED AT
FUTURE LAND USE.
SO FROM THERE WE REFINED THAT
AREA TO WHAT YOU SEE ON THE
SCREEN.
WE'VE GOT TWO AREAS TO THE
NORTH AND THREE AREAS TO THE
SOUTH AND I APOLOGIZE ONE B
SHOULD ALSO BE SHADED BLUE BUT
BASICALLY WHAT WE DID WAS WE
TOOK THE AREAS THAT HAD THE
HIGHEST IDENTIFIED NEED AND PUT
THAT IN OUR RECOMMENDATION SO
THE APPROVAL PROCESS FOR A
BOUNDARY EXPANSION COUNCIL GETS
TO DECIDE THE BOUNDARY
DEPENDING ON THE DIRECTION THAT
WE GET FROM COUNCIL WE WILL
INCLUDE IN OUR PLAN THAT
BOUNDARY.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT
WITH EXPANSION AREAS OUR TAXING
AUTHORITY PARTNERS DO HAVE THE
OPTION OF OPTING OUT.
SO THAT DOES MEAN LESS REVENUE
IF THEY CHOSE TO OPT OUT.
HOWEVER, IT DOESN'T IMPACT
WHERE WE CAN INVEST.
SHOULD COUNCIL NOT BE
INTERESTED IN THE EXPANDING ITS
BOUNDARY?
NO CHANGE WILL OCCUR.
OUR PLAN WILL INCLUDE OUR
CURRENT BOUNDARY SO NOW WE'RE
GOING TO MOVE ON TO OUR TIF
CAPTURE.
WE WILL GO OVER THIS AND A LOT
MORE DETAIL NEXT THURSDAY.
BUT I KIND OF WANTED TO GIVE A
HIGH LEVEL TEASER ON SOME
OF THESE SLIDES SO THIS IS A
STANDARD TIF MODEL.
THIS IS WHAT IS USED IN MOST
COMMUNITIES ACROSS MICHIGAN.
WE DID FIND TWO COMMUNITIES
THAT USE A DIFFERENT MODEL FOR
CAPTURE IN ARBER BEING ONE BUT
BASICALLY THAT ORANGE RECTANGLE
AT THE BOTTOM THAT IS THE BASE
THAT TAXING THE CITY AND THE
OTHER TAXING UNITS RETAIN AND
THAT BLUE AREA ABOVE THE BASE
IS THE REVENUE THAT A DIVA
WOULD CAPTURE TO MAKE
INVESTMENT IN IN DOWNTOWN.
SO THE NRA MODEL IS MUCH
DIFFERENT AND WE'LL START AT
THE BOTTOM SO YOU CAN SEE WHERE
WITH THE ORANGE RECTANGLE IN
ADDITION TO THE BASE IN ANN
ARBOR TAXING UNITS ALSO CAPTURE
INFLATION DOES NOT CAPTURE
INFLATION BUT MOST
SIGNIFICANTLY IN TWENTY
SEVENTEEN A THREE POINT FIVE
PERCENT CAP WAS PLACED ON THE
DIVA'S GROWTH AND YOU CAN SEE
WHERE OUR REVENUE LINE FLATTENS
OVER TIME AND THAT ORANGE
TRIANGLE ABOVE THAT BLUE
SECTION THAT IS THE THAT
REPRESENTS THE TIFE CAPTURE
THAT GOES BACK AND IS
DISTRIBUTED AMONG THE CITY AND
THE OTHER TAXING UNITS.
SO WITH THIS MODEL THE DDA IS
LIMITED AT BOTH THE BOTTOM AND
THE TOP.
SO GRAND RAPIDS IS THE OTHER
COMMUNITY WE FOUND THAT DOES
NOT USE THAT STANDARD TIF
MODEL.
THEY USE A GAIN SHARE MODEL AND
I'LL JUST BRIEFLY WALK THROUGH
THIS SO IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN THEY
ESTABLISHED A NINETY TEN SPLIT
SO THE GRAND RAPIDS DEDé
RECEIVES RECEIVED NINETY
PERCENT OF THE TIP CAPTURE THE
OTHER TAXING UNITS 10 PERCENT.
THEY THEN TAKE A STEP APPROACH
SO EVERY FIVE YEARS THAT AMOUNT
THAT GOES BACK TO THE OTHER
TAXING AUTHORITY UNITS
INCREASES AND IT MAXES OUT AT
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT SO THEY MAX
OUT AT A SEVENTY FIVE TWENTY
FIVE SPLIT.
SO BASICALLY AS VALUES GO UP IN
DOWNTOWN GRAND RAPIDS EVERYBODY
BENEFITS IT GIVES THE DOWN TO
IT GIVES THE GRAND RAPIDS DENHA
THE ABILITY TO MAKE THE
INVESTMENTS IT NEEDS TO MAKE.
>> SO WHAT WE WILL BE PROPOSING
TO COUNCIL IS A GAIN SHARE
MODEL SIMILAR TO GRAND RAPIDS
WITH A LITTLE CAP A FEW CAVEATS
SO IN IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE IN
NY TWENTY SIX THAT AMOUNT THAT
GOES BACK TO THE OTHER TAXING
AUTHORITY SO THAT ORANGE
TRIANGLE AT THE TOP OF THE
GRAPH WILL BE AT ABOUT TWENTY
EIGHT PERCENT OF THE TOTAL TIF
CAPTURE.
SO WHAT WE WOULD BE SUGGESTING
IS WE LOCK IN AT A 70 30 SPLIT
SO THAT TEXT THE CITY IN THE
OTHER TAXING UNITS WOULD
RECEIVE THIRTY PERCENT OF THE
TASK OF THE TIFE CAPTURE
THROUGHOUT THE LIFE OF THE PLAN
AND THE DENHA WOULD RECEIVE
SEVENTY PERCENT OF THE CAPTURE
.
SO WHAT WOULD THE OUTCOMES BE
SHOULD OUR TIP CAP BE ADJUSTED?
IT WOULD ALLOW US TO EXPAND THE
WORK THAT WE DO SPECIFICALLY IT
WOULD
ALLOW US TO ESTABLISH A
DOWNTOWN SERVICE TEAM WE COULD
FUND MORE PROJECTS, WE COULD
FUND LARGER SCALE PROJECTS AND
BASICALLY MAINTAIN AREAS WITHIN
OUR BOUNDARY TO A HIGHER
DEGREE.
THE APPROVAL PROCESS WHEN THE
CAP WAS PUT IN PLACE BACK IN IT
WAS ACTUALLY PUT IN PLACE IN
TWENTY THIRTEEN WAS IMPLEMENTED
IN TWENTY SEVENTEEN AT THAT
TIME IT WAS A CHANGE TO CITY
CODE STATE STATUTE HAS CHANGED
SINCE THEN SO IF THERE IS
INTEREST FROM COUNCIL IN MAKING
AN ADJUSTMENT WE WOULD WORK
WITH CITY FINANCE AND LEGAL ON
THE PROPER MECHANISM TO MAKE
THAT CHANGE.
SO NOW ON TO PROJECTS AND
PROGRAMS SO NEXT THURSDAY WE'RE
GOING TO BE COMING TO YOU WITH
FOUR SCENARIOS.
THOSE SCENARIOS WILL RANGE FROM
A BOUNDARY EXPANSION AND A TIFF
CAP ADJUSTMENT ALL THE WAY TO
STATUS WHERE NOTHING WILL
CHANGE WITHIN EACH OF THOSE
SCENARIOS WE WILL HAVE PROJECTS
LISTS SO YOU CAN SEE WHAT WOULD
BE ACCOMPLISHED UNDER EACH
SCENARIO.
AGAIN, THE DECISION IS COUNCILS
AND WE ARE READY TO EXPAND OR
CONTRACT OUR WORK DEPENDING ON
YOUR DESIRES.
SO WITH THAT I LOOK FORWARD TO
SEEING YOU ALL NEXT THURSDAY.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
FINALLY ROUNDING OUT THE
INTRODUCTIONS, WE HAVE A
PRESENTATION FROM SHERIFF
CARTER OF OUR INDEPENDENT
COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT
COMMISSION.
CHAIR CARTER, YOU CAN THANK YOU
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
MAYOR ADMINISTRATED A HOME
MEMBERS OF COUNCIL MADAM CLERK
,GOOD EVENING.
YOU HAVE IN FRONT OF YOU I
THINK A COPY OF THE PARK TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR REPORT AND WE GOT
IT OUT I THINK AS QUICKLY AS WE
COULD AND I HOPE YOU WILL TAKE
SOME TIME AND TAKE A LOOK AT IT
AT THE BEGINNING WILL SEE OUR
MISSION IS THE SAME AS IN LAST
YEAR'S REPORT BUT WE DO WE
STILL A NUMBER OF THINGS THAT
WE HAVE DONE LAST YEAR AND JUST
AS AN ASIDE THERE'S A PICTURE
THERE OF OUR SUPPORT FOR THE
JUNETEENTH AND WE HAVE A MAYOR
AND COUNCIL PERSON A DENHA IS
THERE AT OUR TABLE AND WE WE
GOT A LOT OF INFORMATION OUT AT
THAT TIME.
I'D LIKE YOU IF YOU WOULD
PLEASE JUST TURN TO PAGE FIVE
REAL QUICKLY IN THE REPORT WE
QUOTED FROM THE POET MAYA
ANGELOU IN THE REPORT AND SHE
SAID, YOU KNOW, PEOPLE WILL
FORGET WHAT YOU SAY TO THEM AND
THEY'LL FORGET WHAT YOU DO FOR
THEM BUT THEY WILL NEVER FORGET
HOW YOU MADE THEM FEEL.
WHEN WE LOOK AT THE COMPLAINTS
THAT WE'VE HAD A LOT THE
LARGEST PERCENTAGE AS YOU CAN
SEE IN BOTH OF THE THE PIE
CHARTS THEY'RE BOTH FROM TWENTY
TWENTY THREE TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
THE LARGEST PERCENTAGE WAS TYPE
THREE COMPLAINTS AND THAT
INCLUDES WHEN PEOPLE COMPLAIN
THEY USE ADJECTIVES SUCH AS
RUDE, UNPROFESSIONAL,
AGGRESSIVE, HUMILIATED,
BERATED, SARCASTIC PROFANITY
INAPPROPRIATE.
WE WE ARE WORKING AND TEETH
ANDERSON HAS WORKED WITH US.
WE ARE VERY HAPPY WITH OUR
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE CHIEF BUT
YOU KNOW IT'S HARD TO CHANGE
PEOPLE AND BUT THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT WE HOPE WE CAN
SORT OF TAMP DOWN THAT KIND
OF OF A COMPLAINTS AS WE AS WE
LOOK AT HOW OUR POLICE OFFICERS
ARE BEING TRAINED.
THE CHIEF HAS SET UP A TRAINING
FOR PARK SO WE CAN SEE WHAT
TRAINING THE OFFICERS RECEIVE
AND THAT'S GOING TO BE A THREE
HOUR TRAINING ON APRIL TWENTY
FIRST.
SO WE'RE LOOKING FORWARD TO
THAT.
WE ALSO AND I MENTIONED THIS
LAST TIME I THINK I COACHED OUR
VICE CHAIR WAS HERE LAST TIME.
>> WE ARE HAVING OUR FIRST
ANNUAL JUDE WALTON MEMORIAL
SYMPOSIUM SOCIAL JUSTICE
SYMPOSIUM THAT'S GOING TO BE
MAY 21ST AND YOU'LL BE GETTING
MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THAT.
WE EXPECT TO HAVE SOME VERY
POWERFUL SPEAKERS TO COME IN
AND OPEN IT UP FOR COMMUNITY
DISCUSSION.
SO HOPEFULLY MANY OF YOU WILL
JOIN US FOR THAT.
I THINK ALSO BEFORE I LEAVE THE
THE REPORT YOU'LL ALSO SEE THAT
WE LISTED SEVERAL
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WE HAD
MADE TO THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
IN TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND
WE'RE JUST HAPPY TO SEE THAT
SOME OF THEM HAVE BEEN
IMPLEMENTED AND ONE OF THEM
THAT WE ARE MOST HAPPY ABOUT
YOU KNOW WE HAD SO MANY
COMPLAINTS WHEN A POLICE
OFFICER PULLS ME OVER IN MY CAR
THEY JUST SAY GIVE ME YOUR
LICENSE AND REGISTRATION AND
YOU SAY WHY WAS I STOPPED AND
GIVE ME YOUR LICENSE AND
REGISTRATION WE'VE HAD WE HAD A
LOT COMPLAINTS LIKE THAT.
WELL, THERE'S A NEW POLICY AS
WE UNDERSTAND IT NOW POLICE
OFFICERS ARE DIRECTED WHEN THEY
MAKE A TRAFFIC STOP TO
INTRODUCE THEMSELVES AND
EXPLAIN THE REASON FOR THE
STOP.
SO HOPEFULLY THAT THE POLICY
THERE AND IF WE DON'T GET ANY
COMPLAINTS ABOUT IT, WE'LL
WE'LL SEE THAT HOPEFULLY IT'S
BEING IMPLEMENTED.
SO THAT IS ALL THAT I HAVE FOR
YOU THIS EVENING UNLESS YOU
HAVE ANY QUESTIONS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVE TIME PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVE TIME IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK TO COUNCIL THE COMMITTEE
ABOUT MATTERS MUNICIPAL
INTEREST TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC
COMMENT RESERVE TIME ONE NEEDS
TO HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BY
CONTACTING OUR CITY CLERK
SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES HAVE
THREE MINUTES IN WHICH TO
SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING AND
WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED WHEN
YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED PLEASE
CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE
THE FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER IS KEN GARBER
.
THANK YOU MR. CHAIRMAN.
NICE TO SEE YOU ALL AGAIN.
KEN GARBER, SECOND WARD.
>> I'M HERE ABOUT THE NEW GI
GAS FRANCHISE.
TWO YEARS AGO STAFF TOLD YOU
THIS QUOTE WE SEE UPCOMING
FRANCHISE DISCUSSIONS AS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO PROVIDE
RESIDENTS WITH ENERGY CHOICES
THAT ARE SAFE, HEALTHY,
AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN BY
EXPLORING OPTIONS THAT ALLOW US
TO HEAT OUR HOMES AND
BUSINESSES WITH CLEAN,
RENEWABLE AND AFFORDABLE
ENERGY.
THIS NEW FRANCHISE DOES LITTLE
OF THAT.
THERE IS AN ENERGY EFFICIENCY
PILOT WILL BID ON NETWORK
GEOTHERMAL AND BRIAN, PERHAPS
ONE OTHER SITE SOME MONEY FOR
WORKER TRAINING, COORDINATION
WITH THE CITY AND SOME BUT NOT
ALL D.T. GASLINE DIG'S JOINT
PANEL TO DEVISE FUTURE WORK
PLANS, REGULAR MEETINGS TO
DISCUSS THINGS, SOME NEW
REPORTING AND A YEARLY MEETING
WITH THE COMMUNITY THAT'S ABOUT
IT.
HERE'S JUST SOME OF WHAT'S
MISSING.
THERE'S NO PROJECT PILOT OR
OTHERWISE FOR RESIDENTIAL
CONVERSION TO HEAT PUMPS THETA
ZERO GOAL QUOTE BY TWENTY
THIRTY THIRTY PERCENT OF OWNER
OCCUPIED HOMES AND TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT RENTAL PROPERTIES HAVE
FULLY ELECTRIFIED AND QUOTE
WE'RE PROBABLY LOOKING AROUND
ONE PERCENT NOW SHOULD HELP
WITH THAT.
IT GIVES REBATES FOR EV
PURCHASES.
WHY NOT FOR HEAT PUMPS?
TWO YEARS AGO I SUGGESTED FREE
HOME ELECTRIFICATION
CONSULTATIONS LIKE THE CURRENT
FREE HOME ENERGY VISITS.
I DON'T SEE THAT HERE EITHER.
ALSO FIVE HUNDRED DOLLAR HEAT
PUMP INSTALLATION REBATE REBATE
TO EACH CURRENT EV CHARGER
REBATE.
THAT'S NOT YOUR EITHER.
THERE IS ALSO NO FRANCHISE FEE
THESE ARE LEGAL IN MICHIGAN IF
BOTH PARTIES AGREE THE FEE
APPEARS ON CUSTOMER UTILITY
BILLS AND GOES TO THE CITY WE
COULD USE IT TO FINANCE
PROJECTS TO GET OFF GAS LIKE
NETWORK GEOTHERMAL AND THERE'S
NOTHING ABOUT LIMITING GAS
HOOKUPS TO NEW CONSTRUCTION.
ACCORDING TO H0, SUCH HOOKUPS
SHOULD HAVE ENDED IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO.
>> MAYBE WE CAN'T STOP THEM BUT
WE CAN AT LEAST SET A GOAL TWO
YEARS AGO.
EXCUSE ME.
YEAH AT THAT TIME STEPH
COMMITTED TO TALKING TO OTHER
PROVIDERS BESIDES DTG QUOTE TO
MAKE SURE THAT INCORPORATES GET
THE BEST DEAL UNQUOTE.
LET'S HEAR MORE ABOUT THOSE NON
DTT DISCUSSIONS BEFORE SIGNING
OFF ON THIS DEAL.
MAYBE THIS IS THE MOST WE CAN
GET FROM DTG IF SO WE'RE ON OUR
OWN GETTING RID OF GAS AND WE
NEED A PLAN FOR THAT FOR SURE.
THIS ISN'T IT.
WE THE PUBLIC JUST HEARD ABOUT
THIS FIVE DAYS AGO AND THAT
NOTICE IS INSUFFICIENT IN MY
OPINION.
I THINK THIS FIRST READING
SHOULD BE DELAYED SO THAT THE
COMMUNITY CAN BETTER DIGEST
THIS AND THAT ENERGY COMMISSION
CAN REVIEW IT SO YEAH,
OBVIOUSLY I'M NOT HAPPY WITH
THE NEW FRANCHISE BUT I THINK
WE SHOULD DEFINITELY DISCUSS IT
MORE AND IF IT'S THE BEST WE
CAN DO SO BE IT.
BUT THEN WE HAVE TO FIND
ANOTHER PATH FORWARD IN TERMS
OF GAS.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU
.
HELLO BRANDON CHEF.
I LIVE IN LAOGHAIRE TOWN IN THE
FOURTH WARD.
I'M HERE TODAY TO SPEAK ABOUT
DC FIVE TO SPEAK ABOUT IT
GENERALLY SECOND BUT I WANT TO
GET THE MOST MY MOST IMPORTANT
REQUEST FIRST PLEASE AMENDMENTS
TO THE HEIGHT LIMIT TO STORIES
INSTEAD OF FEET.
THIRTY FIVE FEET MAY LIMIT
CREATIVE USES OF THREE THREE
STORY BUILDING SUCH AS FIRST
FLOOR RETAIL THAT WE WOULD
REALLY LIKE TO ENCOURAGE
STORIES IS A MORE FLEXIBLE
MEASURE AND IS MORE APPROPRIATE
FOR A COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING
DOCUMENT.
PLEASE FEET TO THE UDC.
I STILL THINK THAT THREE
STOREYS IS TOO SHORT FOR MY
PREFERENCE AND IF I WERE IN
YOUR SEATS I WOULD PROBABLY
VOTE
NO AS A RESULT.
BUT I UNDERSTAND THERE'S A
REASONABLE POLICY DISAGREEMENT
HERE.
LOOK AT THESE LOVELY THREE
STOREY FOUR STOREY TOWNHOMES IN
THE SOUTH END OF BOSTON.
I REALLY THINK THOSE OUGHT TO
BE LEGAL TO BUILD ANYWHERE IN
THE CITY.
I DON'T SEE A REASON TO DETRACT
THE DIRECT PLANNING COMMISSION
TO DISCOURAGE THIS SORT
OF CONSTRUCTION.
ALL THAT BEING SAID, THE REASON
WE'RE EVEN HAVING THIS
CONVERSATION TONIGHT IS BECAUSE
THE ANTI HOUSING ACTIVISTS HAVE
BEEN SPREADING FEAR AND
MISINFORMATION ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN AND
THE PROCESS AROUND IT WHICH IS
CAUSED CONFUSION IN THE
COMMUNITY.
THESE AREN'T HOUSING ACTIVISTS
FALSELY CLAIM THAT THERE HAS
BEEN INSUFFICIENT NOTICE AND
INSUFFICIENT RESIDENT FEEDBACK
.
BUT THESE SAME ACTIVISTS HAVE
BEEN PUBLICLY ENCOURAGING THEIR
FELLOW RESIDENTS TO VOICE THEIR
OPPOSITION TO INCREASING
HOUSING SUPPLY VIA THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING PROCESS.
SINCE AT LEAST TWENTY TWENTY
THREE THESE ACTIVISTS HAVE BEEN
FULLY AWARE OF THE LONG OVERDUE
PLANNING PROCESS WHICH HAS BEEN
GOING ON FOR YEARS.
THE CITY HAS SENT OUT MAILERS,
BUILT WEBSITES, PUT UP SIGNS
THOUSANDS OF SURVEY
PARTICIPANTS AND IT'S SAID
DOZENS OF MEETINGS MOST OF THEM
OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
THERE HAS BEEN AMPLE ENGAGEMENT
.
THE RESULTS ARE THAT ARNAB
RIGHTS BROADLY SUPPORT ADDING
MORE HOUSING IN ALL
NEIGHBORHOODS TO SOLVE THE
HOUSING CRISIS.
I UNDERSTAND THERE IS A VERY
VOCAL MINORITY WITH AN
EXTRAORDINARY AMOUNT OF FREE
TIME ON THEIR HANDS THAT AS
OPPOSED TO ANY POSITIVE CHANGE
TO A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND
ZONING CODES THAT COULD
POSSIBLY INCREASE DENSITY THESE
SEEM OUT OF TOUCH.
ACTIVISTS RECENTLY LOST THEIR
SEATS ON COUNCIL AND LOST
MISINFORMATION LADEN CAMPAIGNS
TO AMEND THE CITY CHARTER BY A
THREE TO ONE MARGIN.
THEIR IDEAS ARE UNPOPULAR AND
YOU SHOULD NOT BE AFRAID TO DO
WHAT IS RIGHT.
THE MAJORITY OF US WHO
UNDERSTAND THAT WE HAVE TO
SOLVE THE HOUSING CRISIS WILL
HAVE YOUR BACKS AND AS TIM WAS
SAID ABOUT THAT ABOUT POLITICAL
CAPITAL YOU WIN ELECTIONS TO
BURN CAPITAL AND IMPROVE LIVES.
SURE DON'T BURN IT
UNNECESSARILY.
BUT LET'S MAKE IN OUR BETTER
AND MORE WELCOMING PLACE FOR
OURSELVES AND OUR NEIGHBORS
FUTURE IN ARBITRATES.
>> WELL, THANK YOU FOR YOUR
VISION.
THANK YOU FOR LISTENING.
THANK.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS BRANT
HENDERSON, BRANT HENDERSON
THIRD WARD.
THIS IS GOING TO BE THE POLAR
OPPOSITE OF WHAT YOU JUST HEARD
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, WHAT YOU
SEE RIGHT AWAY IS THAT THEY CAN
THE DEVELOPERS CAN REMOVE TREES
WITHOUT ANY CONSIDERATION.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO PROVIDE
PARKING.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO BE CONCERNED
ABOUT WATER RUNOFF.
THEY ALL THE TRADITIONAL SET
BACKS ARE WAIVED.
BASICALLY IT'S A DEVELOPER'S
DREAM THEY CAN DO JUST ABOUT
ANYTHING THEY WANT, ANYTHING
THEY WANT.
IT'S IN THIS PLAN.
SO IT'S NO SURPRISE THAT THE
HEAD OF THE PLAN COMMISSION IS
A DEVELOPER.
THE DEVELOPERS ARE GOING TO
MAKE A LOT OF MONEY ON THIS,
ESPECIALLY WITH ALL THESE
REQUIREMENTS BEING WAIVED AND
WHAT DO WE GET?
WE'RE GOING TO GET A LOT OF OLD
HOUSES TORN DOWN.
>> WE'RE GOING TO GET
NEIGHBORHOODS DESTROYED AND THE
PROFITS THE PROFITS ARE GOING
TO GO OUTSIDE OF ANN ARBOR
OUTSIDE OF OUR STATE.
A FRIEND OF MINE IS ACTUALLY A
DEVELOPER IN ANOTHER CITY.
HE GOT STARTED IN NINETEEN
SEVENTY FIVE SO I SENT HIM THE
BASICS OF THIS PLAN AND HE JUST
COULDN'T BELIEVE IT.
HE'S IN 50 YEARS IN THE
BUSINESS.
HE COULD NOT BELIEVE ALL THE
THINGS THAT ARE WAVED AND
SHOVED ASIDE.
HE EVEN WONDERS IF IT'S LEGAL
GIVEN THE FACT THAT IT YANKS
THE RUG OUT FROM UNDER
EVERYBODY THAT OWNS A HOME IN
THIS TOWN.
SO I THINK WE KNOW WHERE THIS
IS GOING TO GO.
YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE A FEW
VERY, VERY MINOR CHANGES AND
THEN JAM IT DOWN OUR THROATS.
THAT'S HOW THIS IS GOING TO
WORK IN SOME KIND OF TWISTED
LOGIC YOU THINK YOU'RE CREATING
SOMETHING BUT YOU'RE NOT YOU'RE
DESTROYING HOMES.
YOU'RE DESTROYING NEIGHBORHOODS
AND WE'RE JUST GOING TO GET
MORE CONGESTION.
THAT'S WHAT THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN IS ALL ABOUT.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS MARY
HENDERSON.
>> SHE'LL JOIN US AS SOON.
THANK YOU
.
>> MARY HENDERSON.
I'M THE GO AHEAD.
YES.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES, WE CAN.
YES.
MY NAME IS MARY HENDERSON BROWN
HENDERSON SPOUSE.
I AM ALSO SPEAKING ON THE DC
FIVE PROPOSAL.
I JUST WANT TO REVIEW WHAT WAS
MENTIONED BY THE SPEAKER JUST
EARLIER TO BRANT.
I JUST BECAME AWARE OF THIS
PROPOSAL TWO WEEKS AGO AND I
HAD A ZOOME MEETING WITH SOME
PEOPLE THIS MORNING.
ABOUT TWELVE PEOPLE WERE
PRESENT AND ONLY ONE OF THE
PEOPLE AT THAT MEETING PEOPLE
IN ANN ARBOR KNEW ABOUT THIS.
SO THE WORD HAS NOT GOTTEN OUT
.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT I'VE
KNOWN ABOUT FOR ANY LONGER THAN
TO TWO WEEKS.
I ALSO AM OPPOSED TO THE
ELIMINATION OF SINGLE FAMILY
AND DUPLEX ZONING IN ANN ARBOR
AND REPLACING SINGLE FAMILY
HOUSES AND DUPLEX DUPLEXES WITH
BOX STYLE APARTMENT COMPLEXES
UP TO FOUR STORIES HIGH.
I ATTENDED LAST WEEK'S PLANNING
COMMISSION MEETING THE ASSUMED
AND WITHOUT EXCEPTION ALL
OF THE SUPPORTERS OF THE PLAN
STATED THE REASON THEY'RE IN
FAVOR OF THE PLAN IS BECAUSE
THEY BELIEVE IT WILL LOWER THE
COST OF HOUSING IN ANN ARBOR,
NOT A SINGLE SUPPORTER
MENTIONED SUSTAINABILITY OR
REDUCED CARBON EMISSIONS OR AN
INCREASED TAX BASE AS A REASON
FOR THEIR SUPPORT.
YET THOSE ARE THE ACTUAL GOALS
OF THE PLAN.
LOWER HOUSING COSTS ARE NOT THE
INTENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND URBAN PLANNING STAFF
HAS ACKNOWLEDGED THIS THAT THE
PROPOSAL WILL NOT CREATE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OR LOWER
HOUSING COSTS AND THAT'S BORNE
BY WHAT HAS HAPPENED IN OTHER
CITIES THAT HAVE UPSET.
AND SO THIS WILL NOT CREATE
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOWER
AND MIDDLE INCOME FAMILIES.
THE BENEFICIARIES OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION'S PROPOSAL
A REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS AND
PEOPLE CONNECTED WITH THEM AND
IT'S NOT GOING TO BE THE LOWER
AND MIDDLE INCOME FAMILIES AND
IT'S NOT THE CITIZENS OF AN
URBAN LISA DOES CHOOSE WHAT A
CITY COUNCIL MEMBER AND ON THE
PLANNING COMMISSION IS ONE
OF THE OFFICIALS WHO HAVE
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT THE
ELIMINATION OF SINGLE FAMILY
AND DUPLEX HOUSING WILL NOT
RESULT IN LOWER HOUSING COSTS
LET ALONE AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
SHE THEN BACKPEDALED ON HER
STATEMENT BY SAYING AND I QUOTE
IT IS IMPORTANT TO CREATE NEW
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES AT THE
HIGHER END OF THE MARKET
BECAUSE THOSE UNITS DROP PEOPLE
WHO CAN AFFORD THEM AND CREATE
VACANCIES IN LOWER PRICED
HOUSING UNITS, END QUOTE.
SO LISA IS CONFIRMING THAT THE
NEW HOUSING THAT WILL BE BUILT
WILL BE QUOTE AT THE HIGHER END
OF THE MARKET.
IT WILL BE EXPENSIVE HOUSING
AND IT DOESN'T LOGICALLY FOLLOW
THAT THE PEOPLE IN ANN ARBOR
WHO ARE LIVING ON LESS
EXPENSIVE HOUSING WILL CHOOSE
TO MOVE INTO THE MORE EXPENSIVE
HOUSING FREEING UP THEIR
CURRENT HOUSING PLAN.
I'M SORRY.
THIRTY SECONDS.
OKAY, THANK YOU.
IT'S PART OF PLANNING
COMMISSIONS, COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT AND EDUCATION.
THE PLANNING COMMISSION HAS A
RESPONSIBILITY TO CORRECT THE
MISINFORMATION THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WILL CREATE
LOWER HOUSING COSTS IF EVERY
SINGLE OPPONENT OF THE PLAN
SAID THAT THE REASON FOR
OPPOSITION WAS THAT IT PROPOSES
BUILDING 12 STOREY HIGH RISES
IN RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION THE
CITY COUNCIL WOULD QUICKLY
CORRECTORS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND THE CITY COUNCIL
HAVE AN OBLIGATION TO CORRECT
THE MISINFORMATION THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WILL LOWER
THE COST OF HOUSING AN ENTIRE
TIME.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS LISA JAVINS
.
HI, I'M LISA JAVINS.
I LIVE TEN FIFTY FOR MARTIN
PLACE.
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE
PROPOSAL RESOLUTE IN DC FIVE
THE FIRST LINE OF DC FIVE READS
ZONING THAT PROHIBITS
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING THEN IN
PARENTHESES ALL ARE ONE AND ALL
ARE TO AREAS.
I'M GOING TO STOP RIGHT THERE
THIS IS A MISREPRESENTATION
OF REALITY.
IT SHOULD BE STRUCK FROM THIS
RESOLUTION AS YOU ALL SHOULD
KNOW AND ARBOR PAST ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNIT ORDINANCE IN
TWENTY SIXTEEN AND EXPANDED IT
IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
THIS ESSENTIALLY ENDED SINGLE
FAMILY ZONING IN ANN ARBOR
ALREADY ALLOWING AN ADDITIONAL
DWELLING UNIT ON ANY R ONE OR
TWO LOD AS FOR THE ARE TO THIS
HAS ALWAYS BEEN DUPLEX ZONING
HENCE THE NO TO THE R TWO
DUPLEXES ON A LOT CAN BE PUT ON
A LOT AS SMALL AS FIVE THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET AND AN ADDITIONAL
UNIT CAN BE ADDED FOR EVERY
TWENTY FIVE HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
OF LOT SIZE IF THIS ISN'T
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING AND ZONING
I DON'T KNOW WHAT IS IT IS NO
WONDER THAT PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN
THE R-1 IN OUR TWO ARE
BRISTLING AT THE LABEL
OF EXCLUSION ACCORDING TO OUR
ZONING CODE THESE PEOPLE LIVE
IN MULTIFAMILY ZONES ALREADY
INSERTING PEJORATIVES INTO THE
PUBLIC DISCOURSE IS NOT HELPFUL
.
RESIDENTS ARE GENERALLY TRYING
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT IS GOING ON.
THEY WANT TO PARTICIPATE IN THE
FATES OF THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS.
THIS RHETORIC SHOULD STOP AND
BE PLACED WITH PLACE WITH
GENUINE ENGAGEMENT.
MY SECOND POINT HAS TO DO WITH
THE SECTION OF THE RESOLUTION
THAT MENTIONS COMMUNITY
CONSENSUS.
THE PERCENTAGE OF RESIDENTS
ENGAGED SO FAR ACCOUNTS FOR A
TINY SINGLE DIGIT PERCENTAGE
OF AN ENTIRE POPULATION AND
ONLY A PERCENTAGE OF THOSE
PEOPLE SAID THEY WANTED THESE
SPECIFIC CHANGES.
ZERO PERCENT OF THE PUBLIC HAS
SEEN ANY OF THESE SURVEY OR
FEEDBACK RESULTS IN DETAILED
FORM.
>> I WOULD LIKE SOME
TRANSPARENCY WITH THE NUMBERS
THAT THE CITY IS BASING THESE
IMPORTANT DECISIONS ON WHY NOT
POST THEM ON THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN WEBSITE?
I CAN TELL YOU FOR SURE THAT AT
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS RESIDENTS
ARE NOT EXPRESSING OVERWHELMING
CONSENSUS ON THIS PLAN.
THEY ARE DOING THE OPPOSITE.
I THINK THAT
BECAUSE THEY FEEL
NATURALLY RESISTANT TO THIS TOP
DOWN APPROACH THEY WERE NOT
REACHED OUT TO AT THE START
OF THE PROCESS IN A MEANINGFUL
WAY TO LEND THEIR OPINIONS
EXPERTIZE AND IDEAS FOR GROWTH.
YOU HAVE A WONDERFUL
OPPORTUNITY HERE TO BUILD
COMMUNITY IN THE PLANNING
PROCESS.
OTHER CITIES HAVE DONE THIS SO
FAR.
IT SEEMS LIKE YOU HAVE CHOSEN
AN APPROACH THAT PEOPLE ARE
REJECTING.
THERE IS STILL TIME TO WRITE
THIS PROCESS AND BRING PEOPLE
TOGETHER AND I HOPE YOU WILL DO
IT.
>> THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
JUST GIVING ADAM JUST JOINING
US A LITTLE ADAM SCHERVISH YOU
HAVE A COMMENT.
>> GO AHEAD.
HELLO.
THIS IS ADAM SAVAGE CALLING
FROM THE FOURTH WARD TONIGHT.
I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK TO YOU
ABOUT DC THREE BUT FIRST I
WOULD LIKE TO SAY JUST A FEW
WORDS ABOUT THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
THE PREVIOUS SPEAKER, LISA
JAVINS EMAILED HER NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION TO ENCOURAGE
ATTENDANCE AT PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
IN MARCH OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
AND JOHN GODFREY WAS DOING SO
AS EARLY AS OCTOBER OF 2003.
I THINK IT'S INSULTING TO THOSE
OF US WHO HAVE PUT IN THE TIME
AND EFFORT TO GIVE OUR FEEDBACK
ONLY FOR A GROUP OF FELLOW ANN
ARBOR RIGHTS TO DEMAND TO
SUSPENSION OF THE PLANNING
PROCESS.
FOLLOW THE PROCESS LIKE
EVERYONE STOP DEMANDING SPECIAL
TREATMENT AND PLEASE STOP
SPREADING MISINFORMATION ANYWAY
BACK TO DC THREE.
THIS REAFFIRMS THE CITY'S
COMMITMENT TOWARD VISION ZERO
WHILE I SUPPORT THIS RESOLUTION
I HAVE A FEW SPECIFIC CONCERNS.
FIRST WE HAVE HAD TWO PEOPLE
KILLED ON OUR STREETS SO FAR
THIS YEAR.
ONE WAS A PEDESTRIAN WHO DIED
TRYING TO CROSS PLYMOUTH AND
THE OTHER WAS A DRIVER WHO DIED
OF THE JACKSON CURVE NEAR
WEBERS.
WE'VE ALSO HAD SERIOUS INJURIES
THIS SHOULD BE NOTED IN A
WAREHOUSE CLAUSE JUST AS THOSE
IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR HAVE BEEN
NOTED.
SECOND, IN LIGHT OF THAT YOU
SHOULD INCLUDE AWARE AS CLAUSE
ACKNOWLEDGING THIS FAILURE TO
ACHIEVE OUR COMMITMENT.
FINALLY THERE'S THE FIRST
RESOLVED PLUS THIS REAFFIRMS
OUR COMMITMENT TO ACHIEVING
ZERO OF SERIOUS INJURIES OR
DEATHS ON CITY STREETS BY 2025
WHICH WE'VE ALREADY FAILED TO
DO.
I SUGGEST YOU STRIKE BY 2025
AND REPLACE IT WITH AN
ACHIEVABLE YEAR AS WRITTEN.
THIS CLAUSE DOESN'T MAKE A LOT
OF SENSE TO ME OVERALL THIS
RESOLUTION IS NECESSARY BUT NOT
SUFFICIENT TO RESOLVE CLAUSES
ARE ALL THINGS THAT AS FAR AS I
KNOW THE CITY WAS ALREADY DOING
IF NOT WELL I GUESS THAT'S
WHERE THIS RESOLUTION COMES IN.
I HOPE YOU EVALUATE THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR ACCORDINGLY.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF IMMEDIATE
OUTCOMES I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
FROM THIS RESOLUTION.
I HOPE TO SEE THIS REPORT
AFFIRMATION OF OUR COMMITMENT
DEMONSTRATED TONIGHT WITH
ANOTHER ITEM ON OUR AGENDA 11
GIVEN THE THIRD RESOLVED
CLAUSE, I EXPECT THAT THE
ADMINISTRATOR HAS EXPLAINED HOW
VISION ZERO IS EXPLICITLY
ADDRESSED AND THAT OUR GOALS
OF VISION ZERO AND VMT
REDUCTION ARE CENTRAL TO THIS
WORK.
AN EXPLICIT GOAL OF VISION ZERO
MUST BE PART OF THE CONTRACT.
ALL TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS
GOING FORWARD INCLUDING THIS
PROJECT NEED TO CENTER VISION
ZERO AND DEMAND OF SAFE SYSTEMS
APPROACH TO ELIMINATING DEATHS
AND SERIOUS INJURIES ON OUR
STREETS.
WE NEED NON-FATAL DESIGN SPEEDS
WHEREVER THERE ARE CONFLICT
POINTS WITH VULNERABLE ROAD
USERS PHOTO MORE.
I JOIN OTHERS WHO HAVE SIGNED
THE SAFETY FIRST STADIUM NOW
PROTECTION AND CALLING ON CITY
COUNCIL TO URGENTLY APPROPRIATE
FUNDS TO RECONFIGURE ALL
REMAINING MULTI LANE SEGMENTS
OF STADIUM BOULEVARD AND MAPLE
ROAD.
WHAT SECTION OF WEST LIBERTY
STREET BY AUGUST 20 25 FOR A
TWO YEAR PILOT THIS CONVERSION
MUST INCLUDE PROTECTED BICYCLE
FACILITIES AND SPEED MANAGEMENT
DEVICES TO ENSURE THAT DRIVERS
DO NOT ENDANGER PEDESTRIANS,
CYCLISTS OR OTHER DRIVERS.
IF ANYONE LISTENING TO THIS IS
OF LIKE MIND I URGE YOU TO
SEARCH FOR SAFETY FOR STADIUM
NOW READ ABOUT WHAT WE RE
ASKING FOR AND SIGN THE
PETITION THAT'S SAFETY FOR
STADIUM NOW I BELIEVE THIS
CONCRETE ACTION IS NECESSARY TO
SHOW THE CITY'S COMMITMENT
DIVISIONS ZERO IS REAL.
>> WE NEED ACTION NOW.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
GOODMAN
.
MAYOR GOODMAN IS JOINING US ON
SO ADAM GOODMAN GO.
HI.
THIS IS ADAM GOODMAN.
I'M SPEAKING TO YOU FROM THE
NETWORK ALSO ABOUT VIETNAM ZERO
TEN YEARS AGO CITY COUNCIL
VISION ZERO GOAL TO ELIMINATE
SERIOUS AND FATAL SERIOUS
INJURY FATAL CRASHES BY 2025 IT
IS 2025 AND WE HAVE FAILED.
YEAH, WE'VE HAD AT LEAST TWO
FATAL TO SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES
THIS YEAR AND THERE MIGHT BE
MORE THAT I DON'T KNOW ABOUT
NOW WE HAVE DONE SOME GOOD
THINGS THE RATE OF SEVERE AND
PEDESTRIAN AND BIKE CRASHES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY HAS EXPLODED
WELL AND IN OUR GREAT STATE
BASICALLY FLAT.
SO WE'RE DOING LESS BADLY THAN
MOST AND WE HAVE COMPLETED SOME
SIGNIFICANT SAFETY PROJECTS.
BUT WHAT WE'VE DONE IS NOT EVEN
CLOSE TO ENOUGH.
SO TONIGHT YOU'VE GOT THESE
THREE REAFFIRMING AND ARBOR'S
COMMITMENTS TO DIVISION ZERO
AND REDUCING VEHICLE MILES.
NOW I WAS PRETTY CONFUSED WHEN
I FIRST READ THIS BECAUSE IT
SOUNDED LIKE A RESOLUTION THAT
WASN'T ACTUALLY DOING ANYTHING.
I MEAN CONSIDERING THESE GOALS
IN EVERY TRANSPORTATION PROJECT
WE SHOULD ALREADY HAVE BEEN
DOING THAT RIGHT.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY AFTER
REFLECTING ON THIS A BIT BUT
REALIZE THAT WE WERE NOT THAT
THIS RESOLUTION REALLY IS
NECESSARY.
SO I DO ENCOURAGE YOU TO PASS
IT BUT RECOGNIZE AS THE
PREVIOUS CALLER SAID THAT IT IS
NECESSARY BUT NOT SUFFICIENT.
IN A PERFECT EXAMPLE IF THIS IS
ON YOUR AGENDA TONIGHT ALSO
THAT IS C11 THAT MULTIBEAM ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS THAT THIS
EFFORT WAS MOTIVATED BY PATIENT
ZERO.
BUT THE ACTUAL PROPOSAL AND
CONTRACTS DO NOT APPEAR TO
CENTERED VISION ZERO AND VMT
REDUCTION AS THE PRIMARY GOALS.
BUT ALSO ANOTHER PROBLEM IS
THAT THIS IS FUNDAMENTALLY JUST
ANOTHER YEAR LONG PLANNING
EFFORT BECAUSE WE HAVE SO MANY
PLANS ALREADY IT'S TIME TO
START IMPLEMENTING THEM SO A
NUMBER OF US ARE CIRCULATING A
PETITION CALLED SAFETY FOR
STADIUM OUT WHICH CALLS UPON
THE CITY TO IMMEDIATELY THIS
YEAR RECONFIGURES STADIUM TO
VOUCHSAFE NOT MULTI LANE ROUTE
FOR ALL ROAD USERS.
AND WHAT WE'RE SAYING IS IN
ADDITION TO STUDYING THE STUFF
ON PAPER BUT TO ACTUALLY DO A
RECONFIGURATION AS A PILOT
PROJECT AND EVALUATE IT IN THE
REAL WORLD SO WE'LL BE THERE IN
A FEW WEEKS TO ACTUALLY DELIVER
THIS PETITION TO YOU.
BUT FOR NOW I WANT TO EXPLAIN
WHERE THIS CAME FROM.
SO TALKING WITH OTHER FOLKS WHO
CARE ABOUT ROAD SAFETY, THE
QUESTION CAME UP WHAT WOULD IT
LOOK LIKE IF WE ACTUALLY WERE
COMMITTED TO ACHIEVING VISION
ZERO ANY TIME REMOTELY SOON?
SOCIETY HAS FRANKLY NOT SHOWN
US OF COURSE OF ACTION THAT
WOULD GET US THERE.
SO WE TOOK IT UPON OURSELVES TO
CREATE ONE OR AT LEAST TO
ENVISION A FIRST STEP WOULD
LOOK LIKE AND SO WELL WE THINK
LOGIC FOR PICKING STADIUM.
WE'RE PICKING THIS INTERVENTION
ON STADIUM IS SOUND THIS KIND
OF ISN'T SPECIFICALLY ABOUT
STADIUM.
YOU SHOULD SEE THIS AS AN
EXPRESSION OF FRUSTRATION AND
RAGE THAT THE CITY HAS BEEN SO
UNABLE TO KEEP ITS PROMISES.
>> IF YOU WANT TO PROPOSE A
DIFFERENT INTERVENTION GREAT.
WE'RE OPEN TO THAT.
WE'LL LISTEN TIME ONLY IF IT'S
SERIOUS.
SO YEAH, I ENCOURAGE EVERYONE
TO GO TO SAFETY FIRST STADIUM
DOUG ALL ONE WORD AND OUR
PETITION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS BRIAN
CHAMBERS.
GOOD EVENING.
MAYOR TAYLOR, CITY
ADMINISTRATOR HONY AND COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
MY NAME IS BRIAN CHAMBERS.
I LIVE IN THE THIRD WARD.
I'M HERE TO SUPPORT THE VISION
LAID OUT IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
LAND USE PLAN, ESPECIALLY
AROUND EXPANDING HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY IN LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
I KNOW THERE'S BEEN DEBATE
ABOUT WHETHER LOW RISE MEANS
THREE OR FOUR STORIES AND WHILE
I'M PERSONALLY FLEXIBLE ON THE
NUMBER, I BELIEVE WHAT MATTERS
MORE IN HEIGHT IS HOW BUILDINGS
FIT IN WITH SETBACKS, PORCHES,
SIZE MAXIMUMS AND SETBACKS THAT
MAINTAIN THE FEEL OF THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO IN A FOUR STORY BUILDING,
THE THIRD LEVEL WOULD STEP BACK
AND THE FOURTH LEVEL WOULD STEP
BACK.
YOU CAN SPECIFY THAT AN
ORDINANCE IS NOT PART OF THE
LAND USE PLAN BUT IN THE
ORDINANCE PHASE THOUGHTFUL FARM
BASED ZONING CAN ENSURE THAT
HOMES NEW HOMES WHETHER THREE
OR FOUR STORIES BLEND INTO
THEIR SURROUNDINGS.
I ALSO UNDERSTAND THE CONCERN
SOME RESIDENTS HAVE THAT NEW
BUILDINGS MIGHT RENT OR SELL AT
MARKET RATE PRICES AND THAT'S
NOT AFFORDABLE TO MOST MIDDLE
INCOME FAMILIES.
BUT HERE'S THE REALITY WHEN WE
LIMIT NEW HOUSING PRICES GO UP
ACROSS THE BOARD INCLUDING FOR
EXISTING HOMES.
THE ONLY WAY TO STABILIZE
PRICES AND AND OPEN UP MORE
OPTIONS IS TO ALLOW MORE
HOUSING TYPES IN MORE PLACES.
>> THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN DOES
THAT.
EVEN SO, MARKET SOLUTIONS ARE
NOT ENOUGH.
THAT'S WHY I'M ESPECIALLY
SUPPORTIVE OF THE NEIGHBOR
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST KELTY'S
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS REMOVE
LAND FROM THE SPECULATIVE
MARKET AND MAKE HOMEOWNERSHIP
PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE FOR
CRITICAL WORKERS, FAMILIES AND
FIRST TIME BUYERS.
THIS IS A MODEL THAT KEEPS
AFFORDABILITY IN PLACE OVER
GENERATIONS NOT JUST THROUGH
SUBSIDIES BUT THROUGH STRUCTURE
.
I ALSO BELIEVE THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MOVES US IN
THE RIGHT DIRECTION TOWARDS
GENERAL DENSITY DUPLEXES TYPE
LEXY'S AND SMALL MULTI-FAMILY
BUILDINGS LOOK AND FEEL LIKE
THEY BELONG.
THIS IS ALL FEASIBLE AND IT
GIVES US THE TOOLS TO TAILOR
THE DETAILS FORM SIZE DURING
THE ZONING PHASE WHICH FOLLOWS
WITH FULL PUBLIC INPUT.
IT'S GOING TO BE LIKE ANOTHER
TWO YEAR PROCESS.
I'M ASSUMING PEOPLE REALIZE
THERE'S LOTS OF TIME FOR
INVOLVEMENT.
LET'S NOT LOSE MOMENTUM OVER
WHETHER THE CAP IS THREE OR
FOUR STORIES.
LET'S FOCUS ON WHAT UNITES US A
DESIRE FOR MORE AFFORDABLE,
INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE.
>> AND I THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ERIC
VOYNICH
, MAYOR ERIKA VARNISHES
JOINING US ON ZOOME SAVANNAH
.
>> GOOD EVENING SIR.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS ERIC IVANCICH.
I'M CALLING FROM THE THIRD
WARD.
I WANT TO BEGIN BY THANKING THE
CO-SPONSORS VOTE IN DC THREE
FOR BRINGING IT FORWARD TO CITY
COUNCIL.
THIS STEP IS NECESSARY BUT IS
NOT SUFFICIENT ON ITS OWN.
IT'S BEEN CLEAR FOR SOME TIME
THAT WE WERE NOT ON TRACK TO
MEET OUR VISION ZERO GOALS AND
PROGRESS IS LACKING.
WE SHOULD EXPECT A STRONGER,
MORE FOCUSED RESPONSE.
UNFORTUNATELY MANY OF US FEEL
UNDERWHELMED BY THE CURRENT
EFFORTS AND ARE QUESTIONING THE
COMMITMENT OF CITY STAFF
LEADERSHIP.
THE MOST EFFECTIVE WAY TO
IMPROVE TRAFFIC SAFETY IS
THROUGH BETTER ENGINEERING
OF OUR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK.
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
MAKE OUR ROADS SAFER EVERY HOUR
OF EVERY DAY.
FOR EXAMPLE, LOCAL RESIDENTS
HAVE LAUNCHED THE SAFETY FOR
STADIUM NOW PETITION CALLING
FOR REDESIGNING STADIUM
BOULEVARD FROM TRADER JOE'S TO
ALDY.
THIS STRETCH OF ROAD WHICH
RANGES FROM FOUR TO FIVE LANES
WIDE PASSES BY THREE SCHOOLS
AND A COUPLE OF PARKS IN 2023
THIS AREA SAW MORE COMBINED
SERIOUS INJURIES AND FATALITIES
THAN ANY YEAR SINCE WE ADOPTED
VISION ZERO IN 2015 AND ONLY
TWENTY TWENTY ONE HAD MORE
FATALITIES THAN THE TWENTY
TWENTY THREE.
THEREFORE I URGE CITY COUNCIL
TO OFFICIALLY ADOPT SAFETY
STADIUM AS ONE OF MANY NEEDED
STEPS ON A PERSONAL NOTE I'VE
BEEN HELPING MY NEPHEW LEARN TO
DRIVE.
HE HAS HIS LEARNER'S PERMIT AND
MOST OF HIS PRACTICE.
KRADDICK HAS BEEN WITH ME
TOGETHER.
WE'VE WITNESSED FAR TOO MANY
RECKLESS AND DANGEROUS DRIVING
BEHAVIORS ON THE ROAD AND WHILE
REDESIGNING OUR STREETS MUST BE
THE TOP PRIORITY, ENFORCEMENT
ALSO HAS A ROLE IN CURBING
THESE BEHAVIORS.
LOOKING AT THE DATA FROM THE
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR FROM TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR ON THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S TRANSPARENCY
DASHBOARD THERE WERE 2500 67
CRASHES THAT YEAR SINCE SOME
CRASHES INVOLVE MULTIPLE
VEHICLES FIVE THOUSAND ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIVE DRIVERS
WERE INVOLVED IN CRASHES.
MEANWHILE ONLY TWO THOUSAND
NINE HUNED SEVENTY EIGHT
CITATIONS WERE ISSUED IF A
MINOR SETTING THIS DATA
CORRECTLY THAT MEANS THE DRIVER
WAS SEVENTY THREE PERCENT MORE
LIKELY TO BE IN A CRASH THAN TO
RECEIVE A CITATION IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR SINCE OUR CITY
ENGAGES IN STATE LEVEL LOBBYING
EITHER JUST TO PUSH FOR
OVERTURNING THE STATEWIDE BAN
ON AUTOMATED TRAFFIC
ENFORCEMENT, AUTOMATED
ENFORCEMENT REDUCES THE NEED
FOR RISKY TRAFFIC STOPS AND
APPLIES THE SAME STANDARDS
ACROSS THE BOARD FOR ALL
DRIVERS.
THE EVIDENCE FROM OTHER PLACES
IS CLEAR AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT
REDUCES CRASHES AND SAVES LIVES
30 SECONDS.
>> FINALLY I ASKED THE CITY
COUNCIL ADD AN ADDITIONAL
RESOLVES CLAUSE TO DC THREE
THIS US WOULD DIRECT CITY STAFF
LEADERSHIP INCLUDING THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR, THE
TRANSPORTATION MANAGER AND THE
POLICE CHIEF TO REPORT BACK TO
CITY COUNCIL WITHIN A FEW
MONTHS AT MOST THE REPORT
SHOULD OUTLINE THE SPECIFIC
STEPS THEY WILL TAKE TO MAKE
MEANINGFUL PROGRESS TOWARDS
VISION ZERO.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS HENRY
HERSKOVITS
.
GOOD EVENING WIKIPEDIA DEFINE
HOLOCAUST DENIAL AS AN
ANTI-SEMITIC CONSPIRACY THEORY
THAT ASSERTS IN PART THAT THE
ACTUAL NUMBER OF JEWS MURDERED
IS SIGNIFICANTLY LOWER THAN THE
ACCEPTED FIGURE
OF APPROXIMATELY SIX MILLION IT
HAS BEEN EXPOSED IN THIS
CHAMBER THAT THE ANTI
DEFAMATION LEAGUE SLANDERS ME
AS A HOLOCAUST DENIER PERHAPS
FOR THE SAME REASON BECAUSE I
BELIEVE THAT SIX MILLION JEWS
DID NOT DIE IN THE HOLOCAUST
BUT I'M APPARENTLY NOT ALONE.
FAMED HOLOCAUST HISTORIAN RAUL
HILBERG KNOWN AS THE PREEMINENT
SCHOLAR ON THE HOLOCAUST BY
WIKIPEDIA COMMITS THE SAME
ERROR IN NINETEEN EIGHTY FIVE
HILBERG WROTE THE STUDENT
EDITION OF THE DESTRUCTION
OF THE EUROPEAN JEWS THE FIRST
LINE IN HIS CHAPTER TITLED THE
PERPETRATORS READS THE GERMANS
KILLED FIVE MILLION JEWS NOT
SIX MILLION.
WHAT DOES THAT MAKE RAUL
HILBERG IF NOT A DENIER?
AND WHAT ABOUT YAD VASHEM?
ACCORDING TO ITS WEBSITE, YAD
VASHEM IS THE WORLD HOLOCAUST
REMEMBRANCE CENTER IN PALESTINE
AND IS QUOTE DEDICATED TO
PRESERVING THE MEMORY OF JEWS
WHO WERE MURDERED.
THEIR WEBSITE CONTINUES OVER
FOUR MILLION NINE HUNDRED
THOUSAND OF THE NEARLY SIX
MILLION JEWS MURDERED BY THE
NAZIS AND THEIR ACCOMPLICES ARE
COMMEMORATED HERE IN ADDITION
TO NOT BEING ABLE TO LIST SIX
MILLION DEATHS, THEY ADMIT
QUOTE THIS DATABASE INCLUDES
INFORMATION REGARDING VICTIMS
OF THE SHOAH, THOSE WHO WERE
MURDERED, MANY WHOSE FATE HAS
YET TO BE DETERMINED AS WELL AS
SOME WHO SURVIVED AND QUOTE
THAT WOULD REDUCE THEIR
ESTIMATE FOUR POINT NINE
MILLION EVEN FURTHER JEWISH
VICTIMS OF NATIONAL SOCIALIST
AGGRESSION WOULD INCLUDE, FOR
EXAMPLE, SHOP OWNERS WHO LOST
THEIR BUSINESSES BUT DID NOT IN
FACT DIE DURING THE WAR.
AND THEIR LIST INCLUDES SOME
WHO SURVIVED.
WHAT A CONFUSING LIST THIS IS.
WHY DON'T THEY CLEAR THE AIR
AND LIST FOR US EXACTLY THE
NAMES OF JEWISH DEATHS?
THAT SHOULD BE AN OPEN QUESTION
.
ANN ARBOR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
AS THEY STUDY THIS STATE
MANDATED TOPIC.
SO WHEN I'M CALLED A HOLOCAUST
DENIER I SHOULD SAY WHEN I'M
NAME CALLED A HOLOCAUST DENIER
BY THE ANTI DEFAMATION LEAGUE,
I'M STANDING IN PRETTY GOOD
COMPANY.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS STEFAN
TRENGOVE
.
I JUST TURNED 76 TWO DAYS AGO
AND WEARING JUST CUTTING OUT
OF THIS I'LL SPEAK LOUDER.
PLEASURE TO SEE YOU.
I HAVEN'T MET SOME OF YOU HAVE
BEEN I CAME HERE 35 YEARS AGO
AND FIRST LET ME GIVE YOU JUST
A CREDENTIAL.
WE ESCAPED FROM BULGARIA, CAME
HERE AND STARTED A LIFE I LOVED
ARCHITECTURE AND I WAS PLAYING
HOCKEY AND I GAVE IT UP.
CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS JUST GAVE IT
UP FOR ARCHITECTURE AND THE
SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE IN
MINNESOTA WAS SECOND IN THE
NATION AND THEY DREW IN MY
PROFESSOR HAD ONLY ONE HAND
RALPH RAPSON, FAMOUS PROFESSOR
AND HE TAUGHT US HOW TO TO
DRAWINGS TO COMMUNICATE HOW TO
CONCEPTUALIZE CITIES WHICH
FASCINATED ME BECAUSE MY
DAD HAD A FOUNDRY AND I GREW UP
IN BLOCKS SO 14 YEARS AGO I MET
MY FRIEND HERE AND I I'VE BEEN
DOING IT FOR THE CODPIECE.
ONCE YOU PUT SULTANOV ON ONE
SIDE YOU PUT ON THAT AND SO
FORTH.
>> SO I DECEMBER AROUND THE
COUNTRY TO BIG ARCHITECTURAL
FIRMS SO WHEN I CAME HERE AND I
WATCHED MR. HABER STRUGGLE I
GOOD YOU KNOW THE CITY NEEDS
SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
SO I DID A CONCEPT WELL THE
FIRST CONCEPT WAS POPULAR
SUPPORT AND THIS IS MY FOURTH
CONCEPT AND I'M SURE THAT SOME
OF YOU HAVE SEEN IT BUT I'M
HERE TO ILLUSTRATE WHAT'S
BECAUSE I'M WORKING ON THE
CONCEPT THIS IS THE THIS IS THE
FOURTH CONCEPT THIS CONCEPT
RIGHT HERE IS A CONCEPT I
EVERYTHING WE'RE GOING TO GET
HIM BACK AND THEN I CALL THIS
IDEA THAT THE NICE THING ABOUT
THIS PLASTIC MODEL I CAN CHANGE
IT 100 HUNDRED TIMES NOW ONE
OF THE JOBS IT'S GIVEN TO ME BY
I HAVE A HUGE ROLODEX.
THIS IS WALL STREET.
IT'S TWO BLOCKS FROM THE RIVER
TO WALL STREET.
BUT IF YOU NOTICE THAT THEY
HAVE AN AREA ABOUT THE SIZE
OF THE LIBRARY LIKE THAT IS
TREES BECAUSE WE NEED TO
BREATHE.
WE NEED TO BREATHE, REHIRE
CULTURAL FREEDOM OF A THOUSAND
DOLLARS 14 YEARS AGO TO GIVE US
A CONCEPT WHICH NOW WOULD BE
WORTH THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND DO
WHAT WE SHOULD DO IN OUR CITY.
>> HE CALLS A DIAGONAL WE NEED
TO GET THIS WHEN HE TREES THE
CORNER NEED TO BE STRONG AND SO
WE INCORPORATE SOME OF THE
THINGS BUT NOW COMES TO PLAY AT
THE LIBRARY IS INTERESTED.
I LOVE THE LIBRARY.
>> IT'S A GOOD PROJECT.
>> THIS IS MY FIRST DELIVERY
NEXT MONTH HERE THE SECOND.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
ATTENTION.
I APPRECIATE IT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PHILLIP
TRIBLE PORCHLIGHT
.
>> HELLO.
I AM A THIRD WARD RESIDENT AND
A TEN YEAR RESIDENT OF THE CITY
AND FOR ALL THOSE TEN YEARS I
HAVE ALSO BEEN A YOUTH BASEBALL
AND SOFTBALL COACH AND I'M
GOING TO SAY BASEBALL I MEAN
BOTH WHEN I SAY BASEBALL I MEAN
BOTH BASEBALL AND SOFTBALL AND
I'M COMING TO SPEAK ABOUT THE
POP OF DOG PARK THAT'S BEEN
CONSTRUCTED AT VETERANS PARK.
IT IS VERY, VERY POPULAR
AND I
WOULDN'T GIVE AN OPINION ABOUT
WHAT KIDS ARE LOSING WITH THAT
DOG PARK CURRENTLY BEING IN
PLACE WHERE IT IS.
WE HAVE ENOUGH CHALLENGES WITH
YOUTH BASEBALL IN ANN ARBOR.
THERE'S NO LITTLE LEAGUE IN ANN
ARBOR IF YOU HAVEN'T NOTICED
IT'S VERY, VERY DIFFICULT TO
GET FIELDS BECAUSE OF THE WAY
THE SCHEDULING AND RESERVATION
SYSTEM WORKS AND IN ALREADY WE
HAVE EVERY FENCED IN FIELD AT
VETERANS IN SOUTHEAST
BICENTENNIAL IS ALREADY A DOG
PARK DURING THE DAY IF YOU GO
THERE DURING THE DAY THERE'S
ALWAYS DOGS RUNNING AROUND
EVERY FIELD.
THERE'S NOT REALLY ANY
ENFORCEMENT AND SO WHY WOULD WE
GO AND TAKE ONE OF THOSE FIELDS
AND TURN IT INTO ANOTHER SPACE
FOR DOG OWNERS WHEN ALREADY WE
DON'T HAVE SPACE FOR THE KIDS
WHO WANT TO BE ABLE TO PLAY
BASEBALL AND SOFTBALL HERE IN
THE CITY ON MARCH 31ST, SOME
YOUTH BASEBALL COACHES IN ANN
ARBOR WERE NOTIFIED THAT THAT'S
NUMBER FOUR WHICH IS WHERE THE
DOG PARK IS IN VETERAN'S PARK
WOULD REMAIN A DOG PARK UNTIL
AT LEAST APRIL 20TH.
THAT MEANS THAT KIDS WHOSE
BASEBALL GAMES WERE SCHEDULED
FOR APRIL 15TH, 16TH, 17TH ALL
NOW HAVE TO SCHEDULE THOSE
GAMES AND ON ONLY ONE OF THOSE
DATES WHERE THEY OFFERED AN
EQUIVALENT FIELD AND THAT WAS
THE SEVENTEENTH I BELIEVE.
AND SO WHAT ARE THEY SUPPOSED
TO DO?
THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO PLAY
THEIR FIRST GAME OF THE SEASON.
NOW THERE'S NO WHERE IN THE
CITY FOR THEM TO PLAY MONEY HAS
BEEN INVESTED IN THE DOG PARK
SIGNAGE, NEW FENCES AND IT'S
BEEN A LOT OF ENCOURAGEMENT FOR
PEOPLE TO ADOPT THAT SPACE AND
THAT TYPE OF INVESTMENT HASN'T
OCCURRED AT THE BASEBALL AND
SOFTBALL FIELDS IN TEN YEARS
THAT I'VE BEEN HERE.
IN FACT, THE COACHES HAVE ASKED
FOR SIGNS THAT SAY PLEASE KEEP
YOUR DOGS OFF THE FIELD BECAUSE
OF DOG THAT ALWAYS WINDS UP ON
THE FIELD AND THEN YOU GOT KIDS
STEPPING IN IT IT'S A PROBLEM
AND WE WERE TOLD BY BOTH
RECOGNIZED STAFF AND CITY STAFF
THAT THE SIGNS WOULD NOT BE
PLACED BECAUSE THEY WOULD JUST
BE IGNORED ANYWAY.
I BELIEVE THAT THEY'RE NOT DOGS
ARE SUPPOSED TO BE UNLEASH ON
THOSE FIELDS AND THEY'RE OFF
LEASH ALL THE TIME.
SO AND ALSO WITH THE
CANCELATION OF RESERVATIONS UP
UNTIL APRIL 20TH, I EXPECT
IT'LL BE MUCH LONGER THAN THAT
THAT IS WE'RE BEING TOLD RIGHT
NOW.
SO I'LL COME BACK IN A FEW
WEEKS AND TELL YOU THAT IT WAS
APRIL 30TH OR EVEN LATER THE
BIGGER ISSUE IS THAT THE CITY
MAKES IT TOO HARD FOR KIDS AND
COACHES TO USE THE CITY'S
BASEBALL FIELDS AND SOFTBALL
FIELDS.
LAST YEAR IN MAY I HAD A T BALL
TEAM OUT ON THE FIELD AT
BEARPARK AND SOMEONE WHO WAS ON
CITY STAFF REPORTED IT AND SAID
WHO'S USING THAT FIELD WITH OUR
MISSION?
IT'S A PUBLIC PARK.
I'VE GOT SIX AND SEVEN FOUR OR
FIVE YEAR OLDS AND A CALL AND
EMAIL GETS MADE TO LITTLE
LEAGUE IPSI OUR LITTLE LEAGUE
SAYING PLEASE DON'T USE OUR
FIELDS ANYMORE.
>> NO WONDER WHY PEOPLE DON'T
USE THE FIELDS BECAUSE WE'RE
BEING TOLD NOT TO USE THEM.
SO THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JEREMY
HAYLIE
.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU ALL FOR HAVING ME.
CHAIRMAN HALEY HIPSLEY
TOWNSHIP.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO DRESS AND
OUR SELF PROJECT FOR A QUICK BY
GOING IF YOU DO THAT FOR THAT
DEVELOPER WITH THE PARTY
STRUCTURE, WHAT WHAT IF THE
NEXT DEVELOPER ARE GOING TO ASK
FOR IT, ASK FROM THE CITY TO DO
FOR YOU FOR THEM OK, AND NOT
ONLY THAT WAS IN THE LAST YEAR
OR SO I READ ON ABOUT THE
INCOME OF THE PARKING
STRUCTURES THAT YOU DO HAVE.
THEY WON'T MAKE ENOUGH MONEY TO
HELP COVER THE COST
OF MAINTENANCE AND STUFF.
SO THEY ARE FAILING.
SO WHY WOULD YOU GO INTO
ANOTHER POSSIBLY FAILING
PROJECT?
>> AND WHAT I WANT TO GET INTO
IS EVERYBODY THAT THE LAST ONE
OF THE MOST RECENT OR ONE
OF THE RECENT DOVEKIE MEETINGS
I WENT TO ONE OF THE TRUSTEES
MENTIONED THAT HE WAS AT
ANOTHER MEETING THAT HE HEARD
THAT PEOPLE ARE WILLING TO LIVE
FORTY SIX MILES AWAY TO WORK
AND ARBOR OR AROUND ANN ARBOR.
>> NOBODY SHOULD HAVE TO LIVE
FORTY SIX MILES AWAY TO WORK IN
ANN ARBOR AND BE WILLING TO
ASSASSINATE REALLY IS AND
BRINGS ME TO U OF M BRINGS A
TOPIC THAT MAYBE IT SHOULD BE A
CONVERSATION TO SAY HEY AS U
OF M KEEPS EXPANDING ITS
STUDENTS, IT KEEPS PUSHING
PEOPLE OUT.
I'M NOT SAYING THERE SHOULD BE
A LIMIT BUT THERE SHOULD BE
CONVERSATION AS TO HAS FIFTY
THOUSAND GOOD ENOUGH BECAUSE
WHAT NEXT YEAR WHAT IN THIS
FALL.
NEXT FALL IS GOING TO BE FIFTY
FIVE OR 60 65 70.
HOW MANY IS ENOUGH YOU KNOW I
MEAN IT IS A GOOD QUESTION TO
ASK AND TO WHAT CITY GOING TO
LOOK LIKE IF YOU HAVE SIXTY
FIVE THOUSAND STUDENTS RUNNING
AROUND YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE HOW
MANY?
THIRTY FORTY YOU KNOW, STORY
BUILDINGS ARE YOU GOING TO HAVE
TO HAVE TO HOUSE THEM WHILE
YOU'RE DOING THAT YOU'RE MAKING
TALKING TO SOME OTHER WHEN I
WAS ON CAMPUS AND TALK TO YOU
ABOUT STUDENT HOUSING THAT THEY
DO HAVE NOW ISN'T AFFORDABLE
FOR THEM FOR RENT SO IT CROSSES
THE BOARD THAT WHATEVER IS
BEING MADE IS NOT A FOR NOBODY
IT NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED AND I
FRANKLY THE QUESTION NEEDS TO
BE ASKED WHAT HOW MANY STUDENTS
THIS IS A GOOD AMOUNT
OF STUDENTS FOR ANN ARBOR
BECAUSE IT CAN'T INDEFINITELY
KEEP GROWING.
SOMETHING'S GOING TO BREAK ON
ONE END.
YOU WANT MORE STUDENTS OR MORE
FAMILIES.
LOOK INSIDE THE SCHOOLS RIGHT
NOW TO PRIVATE SCHOOLS ARE
COMBINING IS THERE NO.
NO, NOBODY'S HAVING KIDS.
HOW MANY KIDS IN OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS NOW YOU HAVE TO
CONSIDER ALL THAT TOO.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ALAN HABOUR
.
HELLO, COUNSELOR.
AGAIN I'M ALAN HABOUR AND THE
FIFTH WARD WHEN THE VOTERS
VOTED IN 2017 18 TO ESTABLISH A
CENTRAL PARK AND CIVIC CENTER
COMMONS AND THE CENTER OF THE
CITY THAT ESTABLISHED WITH YOU
AN OBLIGATION TO THE VOTERS A
PROCESS WAS CREATED TO
IMPLEMENT THAT DIRECTION OF THE
ANN ARBOR CITY CHARTER TO WHICH
YOU ARE ALL OBLIGATED TO WHICH
IS SERVE THE OTHER DAY A COUPLE
OF MEETINGS AGO YOU MADE A
DECISION TO IGNORE THAT
OBLIGATION.
THE STATE OF THE OBLIGATION WAS
CREATED A COUNCIL OF THE
COMMONS TO BE ADVISORY TO THE
CITY COUNCIL, THE COUNCIL, THE
COMMONS WAS NOT FUNCTIONING
VERY WELL.
IT WOULD NOT EVEN LOOK AT THE
PICTURES THAT STEPHANIE
RANDOLPH SHOWED YOU BEAUTIFUL
WORK.
IT HAS BEEN DONE BY CITIZENS
HERE.
WHAT COULD BE BEAUTIFUL IN THE
CENTER OF THE CITY COUNCIL
OF THE COMMONS WOULDN'T LOOK AT
IT.
IT IS DIVIDED IN PART BECAUSE
OF THE WAY IT WAS COMPOSED.
IT MADE THE DECISION I MADE AN
AGREEMENT FACILITATED BY BY
ERIC BRIGGS THAT THE COUNCIL
OF THE COMMONS WOULD RECOGNIZE
THE NEED FOR A PROFESSIONAL
CONSULTATION TO SEE WHAT WAS
THE NEXT STEP IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CITY
CHARTER AND WOULD THEREFORE
DISSOLVE ITSELF WHILE
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS WERE
EMPLOYED TO GIVE SOME DIRECTION
WHICH WE WERE UNABLE TO ARRIVE
AT OURSELVES, WE COULDN'T EVEN
LOOK AT PICTURES TOGETHER THAT
THAT REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR
CONSULTANTS WAS NEVER MADE AND
INDEED YOUR ACTION ON THE
LIBRARY SAYING FORGET ALL THAT,
FORGOT THE CONSULTANTS, FORGOT
THE COMMONS, FORGOT THE PARK,
LET'S GIVE IT TO THE LIBRARY
THAT HAS VIOLATED OUR
OBLIGATION TO THE VOTERS TO
YOUR OATH OF OFFICE, TO THE
AGREEMENT THAT WE MADE THE
CONSULTANTS WOULD BE BROUGHT IN
AND THAT THE PUBLIC PROCESS
OF THE COUNCIL OF THE COMMONS
WOULD BE DISSOLVED.
THAT IS WHAT YOU HAVE VIOLATED.
IT IS BETRAYAL OF YOUR
OBLIGATION TO THE VOTERS AND TO
THE CITY CHARTER.
>> THE MOST SIMPLE WAY TO DEAL
WITH THIS CHANGE THE ELECTION
THAT YOU WANT FROM AUGUST THE
NONVOTE AUGUST ELECTION 2025 TO
THE REAL ELECTION OF 2000 AND
TWENTY SIX AFTER WHICH YOU'VE
HEARD CONSULTANTS GIVE SOME
REPORT DO THE REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS GET IN A YEAR OR SOME
OUTLINE FROM PEOPLE WHO KNOW
APPARENTLY BETTER THAN TO THANK
PEOPLE IN ANN ARBOR?
NO AND IF YOU WANT TO PUT UP
CONTINUE WITH A LIBRARY THING
THEN BE A REAL VOTE THAT WILL
RECOGNIZE YOUR INTEGRITY TO THE
VOTERS.
OTHERWISE YOU'RE IN VIOLATION
OF YOUR OATH OF OFFICE AND YOU
SHOULD SEE YOU KNOW THAT THE
STATE AND THE LAW DOES NOT
RECOGNIZE THAT YOU SHOULD HAVE
SOME INTEGRITY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER
BRAKE'S
I KNOW THAT WE'RE GOING
TO HAVE A CONVERSATION ABOUT
THIS LATER ON IN THE MEETING ON
DEC. FIVE.
BUT SINCE THAT'S THE VERY END
OF THE MEETING I JUST WANTED TO
MENTION TO FOLKS SINCE THERE
WERE SOME COMMENTS I STRONGLY
ENCOURAGE FOLKS SOUNDS LIKE
SOME COMMENTERS HAVE BUT I'M
NOT SURE THAT EVERYBODY IS
AWARE THAT THIS IS NOT YET A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN RELEASED.
AND SO FOR THOSE WHO FEEL LIKE
I'VE HEARD SOME COMMENTS HERE
TONIGHT THAT SUGGESTS THAT
CONCERNS ABOUT WHAT'S IN THE
PLAN JUST THE DRAFT PLAN HAS
NOT YET BEEN RELEASED.
AND SO I ENCOURAGE FOLKS TO GO
TO YOU CAN JUST GOOGLE ANN
ARBOR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
YOU'LL GET ONTO THE WEBSITE, BE
ABLE TO SIGN UP FOR NOTICES AND
YOU WILL BE I'M SURE NOTIFIED
AS SOON AS COUNCIL AND PLANNING
COMMISSION ARE AS WELL WHEN THE
DRAFT PLAN IS RELEASED.
AND I KNOW WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
A LONGER CONVERSATION ABOUT
THIS LATER ON TODAY BUT JUST
WANT TO MAKE SURE WE GOT THAT
OUT.
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL AND I
WILL BE HAVING A BOARD MEETING
LATER ON THIS MONTH WHERE THIS
IS
THE TOPIC OF DISCUSSION.
STAY TUNED
.
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO ANNOUNCE
THAT COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON
AND I WILL BE HAVING A
COFFEE HOUR ON MONDAY, APRIL
14TH WHICH IS NEXT MONDAY FROM
SIX THIRTY TO ROUGHLY OH SEVEN
THIRTY SEVEN FORTY FIVE WITH
FEATURED GUEST JENNIFER HALL
FROM THE ANN ARBOR HOUSING
COMMISSION.
>> SO WE'LL BE ON THE THIRD
FLOOR OF THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY.
>> PLEASE COME COUNCILMAN BRIAN
TO GO.
>> YEAH THANK YOU.
SORRY I SOMEONE ELSE GO FOR IT.
>> YEAH DENHA THANK YOU MAYOR
AND I'VE SPOKEN A BIT ABOUT
THIS ON SOCIAL MEDIA OVER THE
WEEKEND BUT WANTED TO CONTINUE
TO DRAW ATTENTION TO THE VERY
REAL IMPACTS OF THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION ON OUR COMMUNITY
THIS LAST WEEK DUE TO THE
NEARLY 11 BILLION DOLLARS IN
FEDERAL CUTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH
FUNDING ACROSS THE COUNTRY TO
ADDICTION AND ADDICTION
TREATMENT AND
RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS HERE IN
ANN ARBOR ON FARMS AND HOME
OF NEW VISION EXPERIENCED
EXTREME CUTS TO THEIR SERVICES
HERE IN ANN ARBOR FORCING HOME
OF DIVISION, FOR EXAMPLE, TO
SHUTTER THEIR TWENTY FOUR HOUR
CRISIS CENTER HERE IN THE CITY
AND LAYOFF I BELIEVE NEARLY A
THIRD OF THEIR EMPLOYEES.
FOR ME THIS IS PERSONAL.
MY SISTER WAS ONE OF THOSE
EMPLOYEES BUT THE REALITY IS
THAT AS A RESULT OF THESE
ONGOING CUTS FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, THE HACKSAW
APPROACH THAT TRUMP AND MASK
ARE TAKING TO TO PUBLIC
SERVICES WE'RE SEEING NOT ONLY
INCREASES IN UNEMPLOYMENT HERE
IN MICHIGAN IN ANN ARBOR WE'RE
SEEING PRICES RISE.
WE'RE SEEING OUR RETIREMENT
FUNDS TANK BUT WE'RE ALSO
SEEING LIVES PUT AT RISK.
AND SO AS AS FOLKS IN OUR
COMMUNITY WHO HAVE WHO HAVE
STRUGGLED WITH SUBSTANCE USE
DISORDER TURN TO THAT
TRADITIONAL NONPROFITS FOR
HELP, THEY MAY BE MET WITH LESS
SUPPORT THAN THEY'VE HAD IN THE
PAST AND THIS IS THE DIRECT
IMPACT OF THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION.
AND SO THEY ARE NOT THE ONLY
ORGANIZATIONS THAT ARE BEING
IMPACTED THIS WEEK.
THERE ARE OTHER ORGANIZATIONS,
NONPROFITS WHO HAVE BEEN
IMPACTED BY OTHER CUTS
THROUGHOUT THROUGHOUT THE VERY
SHORT PERIOD OF TIME THAT THAT
TRUMP HAS BEEN IN OFFICE AGAIN
.
BUT I AM REALLY JUST
ENCOURAGING MEMBERS OF THE
COMMUNITY TO THE EXTENT THAT
YOU CAN TO CONTINUE SUPPORTING
THESE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
IF YOU'RE ABLE TO TO DONATE TO
THEM TO MAKE SURE THAT THEIR
SERVICES DON'T EXPERIENCE EVEN
MORE DRASTIC CUTS IN THE FUTURE
BECAUSE LIVES OF OUR NEIGHBORS
ARE LITERALLY AT RISK.
>> THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER.
I THANK YOU.
>> FIRST I WANT TO THANK THE
RESIDENTS OF LOWER BURNS PARK
WHO CAME OUT TO A TOWN HALL
THAT COUNCIL MEMBER AKMAN AND I
HOSTED.
WE HAD THE MAYOR THERE.
WE HAD A LETTER FROM CITY STAFF
AND COUNCIL MEMBER DISH WHO IS
OUR LIAISON TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND WE TALKED ABOUT
THAT COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN UPDATE AND IT WAS A REALLY
GREAT DISCUSSION AND FOR ME IT
REALLY HIGHLIGHTED THE
IMPORTANCE OF HAVING FACE TO
FACE DISCUSSIONS WITH RESIDENTS
ABOUT THIS THIS ISSUE THAT'S SO
IMPORTANT TO OUR CITY'S FUTURE.
WE'LL TALK MORE ABOUT IT
TONIGHT WITH THAT RESOLUTION.
BUT COUNCILMAN RACKMAN AND I.A.
ARE UP FOR DOING MORE OF THOSE
THROUGHOUT THE WARD SO STAY
TUNED FOR MORE OF THAT.
>> I ALSO WANT TO COMMENT ON AC
TWO WHICH IS THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR'S MEMO REGARDING
THE PREVAILING WAGE REPORT.
THE FINDINGS IN THIS MEMO ARE A
GREAT REMINDER OF WHY ONGOING
OVERSIGHT AND ENFORCEMENT ARE
SO IMPORTANT WHEN IT COMES TO
PROTECTING WORKERS RIGHTS,
WHETHER IT'S AN HONEST MISTAKE
OR DELIBERATE DECISION WHEN
CONTRACTORS FAIL TO PAY WAGES
THAT THEY'RE REQUIRED TO UNDER
CITY POLICY, OUR WORKERS LOSE
OUT, THEIR WORKERS LOSE OUT AND
THAT'S NOT ACCEPTABLE.
SO THAT'S WHY IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE WE PASSED A STRONGER
SYSTEM OF CHECKS AND
ACCOUNTABILITY.
WE CREATED THAT NEW ENFORCEMENT
STRUCTURE WITH CLEAR
EXPECTATIONS AND BETTER FOLLOW
THROUGH AND A MORE CONSISTENT
PROCESS AND WE ARE NOW SEEING
EACH YEAR SINCE THAT THAT THESE
VIOLATIONS ARE BEING FOUND.
>> WE KNOW THAT MOST
CONTRACTORS WANT TO DO THE
RIGHT THING.
I'M NOT TRYING TO TO SUGGEST
OTHERWISE BUT THIS SITUATION
SHOWS THAT MISTAKES CAN STILL
HAPPEN AND SO CAN BAD BEHAVIOR
AND IT'S OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO
MAKE SURE THAT THE SYSTEMS ARE
IN PLACE TO CATCH THOSE EARLY
AND CORRECT THEM AND ENSURE
FAIRNESS FOR WORKERS EVERY TIME
PUBLIC DOLLARS ARE BEING SPENT
.
I'LL CONTINUE TO PUSH FOR THAT
ACCOUNTABILITY AND I'LL
CONTINUE TO STAND FOR THE
WORKERS WHO BUILD AND MAINTAIN
THE CITY FURTHER COMMUNICATION
FROM COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON SORRY.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR.
THIS PAST WEEK THE MICHIGAN
SUPREME COURT MADE A DECISION
THAT BRINGS OUR LEGAL STANDARDS
IN LINE WITH CURRENT LAW.
THE COURT RULED THAT THE SMELL
OF MARIJUANA ALONE IS NOT A NOT
A VALID REASON FOR POLICE TO
SEARCH SOMEONE'S CAR WITHOUT A
WARRANT.
>> MARIJUANA IS LEGAL IN
MICHIGAN FOR ADULTS THAT MEANS
THE SMELL OF IT ON A PERSON IN
A CAR OR EVEN IN THE AIR IS NO
LONGER EVIDENCE OF A CRIME.
THIS RULING IS GOOD FOR BOTH
RESIDENTS AND LAW ENFORCEMENT.
>> IT HELPS ENSURE PEOPLE
AREN'T BEING CRIMINALIZED FOR
LEGAL BEHAVIOR, BEHAVIOR.
>> IT PROTECTS CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS AGAINST UNREASONABLE
SEARCH AND SEIZURE AND JUST AS
IMPORTANTLY IT GIVES OFFICERS A
CLEAR AND CONSISTENT STANDARD
AND ONE THAT REDUCES LEGAL
CONFUSION, PREVENTS CASES FROM
BEING THROWN OUT AND PROTECTS
OFFICERS FROM LIABILITY.
>> IT ALSO CREATES SPACE FOR
SOMETHING DEEPER AND THAT'S
REHABILITATE REBUILDING TRUST
WHEN PEOPLE BELIEVE THE LAW IS
FAIR, THEY'RE MORE LIKELY TO
FOLLOW IT WHEN THEY FEEL
RESPECT THEY'RE MORE LIKELY TO
COOPERATE.
>> AND WHEN WE TREAT LEGAL
BEHAVIOR AS LEGAL WE MOVE
CLOSER TO A JUSTICE SYSTEM THAT
ACTUALLY HONORS JUSTICE ON A
TOTALLY UNRELATED MATTER.
I WOULD LIKE TO JUST TAKE A
MOMENT TO EXTEND MY CONDOLENCES
TO THE FAMILY OF DESHAWN.
LEEP MY THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS GO
OUT TO SEAN'S FAMILY THE CBI
TEAM WHICH STANDS FOR COMMUNITY
VIOLENCE INTERVENTION TEAM AND
THE YOUTH OF WASHTENAW COUNTY
THAT HAVE BEEN POSITIVELY
IMPACTED DASHAWN DEDICATED
SERVICE.
MAY HE REST IN HEAVENLY PEACE
COUNSELOR AWESOME.
WANT A SECOND?
THOSE WORDS ABOUT SEAN I THINK
MANY PEOPLE KNOW I I BROUGHT
THE FIRST AMENDMENT ON
MARIJUANA FUNDS WHERE WE PUT A
CHUNK OF THOSE FUNDS TOWARD YOU
SERVICES AND ONE OF THOSE
PEOPLE WHO TAUGHT ME ABOUT
YOUTH SERVICES AND WHAT YOUTH
SERVICES MEAN TO BLACK PEOPLE
IN ANN ARBOR AND YPSILANTI
ACROSS OUR COUNTY WAS DASHAWN
LEETH AND I THINK IT'S OFTEN
SAID IN POLITICS THAT YOU KNOW,
THE ONLY PEOPLE THAT KNOW THE
JURISDICTIONAL BOUNDARIES ARE
THE POLITICIANS AND DASHON WAS
AN EXAMPLE OF THAT FACT.
HE WENT TO SKYLINE.
HE DID A LOT OF HIS WORK ON
HOUSING COMMISSION SITES IN ANN
ARBOR HOUSING COMMISSION SITES
IN YPSILANTI.
SO HE TRIED TO SERVE THE
COMMUNITY WHEREVER HE WAS MAY
MAY HE REST IN PEACE.
I ALWAYS HAVE A TOUGH TIME WITH
THIS TRANSITION BUT YEAH, MAY
10TH THERE WILL BE AWARD TO
LISTENING SESSION AT 3:00 P.M.
ON AT TREVER WITH THE LIBRARY
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK AND I
INVITE YOU TO ATTEND.
WE'LL BE TAKING QUESTIONS ON
ALL SUBJECTS NO GUESTS THIS
WEEK BUT WE OBVIOUSLY EXPECT TO
TALK A LOT ABOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
SO ONCE AGAIN HOPE TO SEE YOU
ON SATURDAY.
MAY FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS FROM
COUNCIL
ARE FOLLOWING UP ON THE
FEDERAL IMPACTS ON WHAT'S GOING
ON HERE IN OUR COMMUNITY.
>> I WANT TO TOUCH UPON
STOPWORK ORDER THAT WE AT THE
CITY RECENTLY WERE REQUIRED TO
REQUIRED TO ISSUE ON A NUMBER
OF CRUCIAL STREET PROJECTS.
CRUCIALLY, SOME BUFFORD BIKE
LANES AT HADAN CENTER LINES ALL
OVER THE CITY UP TO TWELVE
MILES ON OUR VARIOUS CORRIDORS.
>> THE STOPWORK ORDER IS THE
RESULT OF THE THAT A NEEDED
ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW NOT BEING
ISSUED BY THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION.
WE ARE NOT YET CERTAIN WHETHER
OR NOT THAT THAT WILL
ULTIMATELY BE ISSUED BUT
BECAUSE OF UNCERTAINTY AND AND
BUT CHANGING REQUIREMENTS AT
THE FEDERAL LEVEL, CHANGING
POLICIES AT THE FEDERAL LEVEL,
WHAT WOULD PREVIOUSLY HAD BEEN
AN EXPECTED ISSUANCE DID NOT
OCCUR.
>> WE'RE HOPEFUL WE HAVE
CONTACT.
WE WERE IN THE PROCESS
OF CONTACTING OUR DELEGATION TO
SEE IF WE CAN GET THIS
UNDERWAY.
HOWEVER, FOR THE TIME BEING
STOPWORK NOTICES HAVE BEEN HAVE
BEEN ISSUED.
I'D LIKE TO RECOMMEND THE THE
FILING APPOINTMENT FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION AT OUR AT OUR
NEXT MEETING TO THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
>> MOLLY
, WE NOW HAVE A FORCE
TO CONSENT TO GENOVEVA MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE CONSENT
AGENDA MOVE BY COUNCILOR AND
SECOND BY COUNCIL MCCONNELL
DISCUSSION OF CONSENT AGENDA.
>> COUNCILMAN BRIGGS, CAN YOU
POST A11 PLEASE?
>> COUNCILOR I WANTED TO
QUICKLY MENTION RELEVANT TO
THEM MAYOR'S COMMENTS ON THE
STOP WORK ORDER THAT'S FOR SAFE
STREETS FOR ALL GRANT AND I
KNEW THAT THE NEAR MISS
ANALYTICS WHICH IS A FIFTEEN
POINT YES THE NEAR MISS VIDEO
ANALYTICS SYSTEM WAS PART
OF THAT PROJECT.
>> IT HAS BEEN SPARED BECAUSE
THE ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW HAD
ALREADY BEEN APPROVED.
>> SO I JUST WANT TO MENTION
THAT FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA SET THE AGENDA
ALL IN FAVOR OR OPPOSE THE
CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED WITH
NINE COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT
ALL VOTE IN THE AFFIRMATIVE
THUS SATISFYING THE EIGHT VOTE
REQUIREMENT WITH RESPECT TO A
FIVE, SIX, SEVEN EIGHT C TEN
S.A TWELVE SEET SEVENTY
EIGHTEEN TO TWENTY ONE 23 24
C11 RESOLUTION TO APPROVE A
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT
WITH TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING
DESIGN DPK FOR MULTI LANE ROAD
RECONFIGURATION VALUATION THE
AMOUNT OF 280000 DOLLARS MEMBER
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF C11
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE THAT AND I ALSO
I'VE GOT A FEW QUESTIONS FOR
STAFF ASKED.
I WANTED TO START BY SAYING I'M
EXTENDING MY THANKS TO THEM.
WE HAD NICE COUNCIL MEMBER
ACKMANN AND I HAD A GOOD
MEETING WITH FOLKS TODAY WE'VE
ASKED SOME QUESTIONS THAT ARE
IN OUR AGENDA RESPONSE PACKET
BUT I ALSO WANTED TO DAYLIGHT
SOME OF THE ANSWERS THAT WE HAD
RECEIVED AND SOME OF THE THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT WE HAD HAD
TODAY IS A STAFF CAN HEAR WE
KNOW AS A COUNCIL THAT THIS IS
A IT'S A REAL COMMITMENT TO US
TO BUT WE ARE NOT WE ARE NOT
MEETING OUR VISION ZERO GOALS
AND THERE WERE A NUMBER
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS OR
COMMENTS ON OUR COMMENTS
TONIGHT.
>> SO FIRST QUESTION IS AND I'M
NOT SURE WHO MIGHT BE ABLE TO
RESPOND TO THIS.
>> WE HAVE I'M TREVOR BRIGHTON
AND NICK HUTCHINSON AND LULU ON
ZUM.
GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH TO THE FIRST
QUESTION IS CAN YOU PLEASE
DISCUSS THE EXPERTIZE THE
CONSULTANTS THAT ARE WORKING ON
THIS PROJECT AND HOW THE MODELS
WILL BE USED NOT SIMPLY RESULT
IN KIND OF PREDETERMINED
OUTCOMES.
THAT IS MORE PEOPLE KIND
OF RESULT IN THE NEED FOR MORE
ROADWAY CAPACITY FOR CARS THAT
SOME OF THE MORE OUTDATED
MODELS MIGHT HAVE MIGHT HAVE
RESULTED IN AND PAST YEARS.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
,CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES, THIS IS BIDEN.
I'M A TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM
MANAGER WITH THE TRANSPORTATION
TEAM AT THE CITY.
>> THE APPROACH TO MODELING
OF THAT WILL BE PART OF THE
STUDY IS ONE THAT IS MUCH MORE
BASED ON CURRENT TRAFFIC
PATTERNS AND VOLUMES AND ONE
THAT IS NOT BASED ON FUTURE
ESCALATION OF FORECASTED
POPULATION OR CAR USE GROWTH.
>> THE PROBLEM THAT WE ARE
RECOMMENDING JOIN US IN THIS
WORK IS TOOL DESIGN.
THEY ARE NATIONWIDE LEADERS AND
BEST PRACTICES FOR FOR BIKE AND
WALKING AND AND PLACEMAKING
PROJECTS THROUGHOUT THE US THEY
HAVE A SPECIFIC FOCUS ON ON
BIKE FACILITY DESIGN AND THEY
HAVE THE BOTH THE INTENT
OF THIS OF THIS PROJECT TO
REEXAMINE THESE ROADWAYS FOR
FOR ALL USERS OF THE ROADWAYS
AND REBALANCING THEM SO THAT
THE SPEEDS THAT ARE PRESENT ON
THOSE ROADWAYS ARE ARE SAFER
AND SLOWER FOR ALL USERS IS
WELL UNDERSTOOD AND THEY HAVE
THE EXPERTIZE TO TAKE ROADS
THAT ARE MORE OF THIS PAST
CHARACTER AND MAKING THEM INTO
PLACES FOR OTHER MODES
OF TRANSPORT AND AND HUMAN LIFE
.
>> THANK YOU.
AND THEN JUST A FOLLOW UP
QUESTION WE'VE HEARD A CALL FOR
FOR RECONFIGURING IMMEDIATELY
SOME OF OUR OUR ROADWAYS
OBVIOUSLY A GOAL THAT IS
ARTICULATED IN OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLANS AND
THERE'S KIND OF AN IMPRESSION
THAT WE COULD DO THIS REALLY
QUICKLY AND SIMPLY AT LOW COST
WITHOUT WITHOUT PLANNING COULD
YOU SHARE HOW THIS EVALUATION
CONTRACT WILL ALLOW US TO DO
SOME DIFFERENT SCENARIO
PLANNING, ADVANCE OUR GOAL
OF SENSIBLY RECONFIGURING
STREETS TO GET PEOPLE WHERE
THEY NEED TO GO, NOT JUST
PEOPLE IN CARS AND HOW THIS
DOES HOW THIS CONTRACT WILL
ADVANCE OUR GOALS NOT JUST GET
US STUCK IN KIND OF A PLANNING
ENGAGEMENT LOOP.
THANK YOU FOR THAT QUESTION AND
WHERE WE ARE LOOKING AT ALL TEN
MULTI-LINE CORRIDORS THROUGHOUT
THE CITY ALL AT ONCE TO TRY TO
GET A ONCE UNDERSTAND OF THE
OPPORTUNITIES THAT ARE THERE
FOR THE FOR THESE ROADWAYS.
THE RESULT OF THE STUDY THE
STUDY WILL LOOK AT EACH
OF THESE CORRIDORS AND SEE AND
SEE IF THERE ARE MULTIPLE
PRIORITIES THAT COULD BE
EXPRESSED THROUGH A CONCEPTUAL
REDESIGN AND THEN GETTING
FEEDBACK FROM COMMUNITY MEMBERS
AND AND BEING ABLE TO THEN TAKE
THOSE TAKE THAT CITY BACK, TAKE
THE CONCEPTS AND COME WITH A
RECOMMENDED CONCEPT AND A AND
AND A COST OPINION OR WHAT IT
WOULD TAKE TO IMPLEMENT THESE
ROADWAYS.
IT'LL TAKE TO ABOUT A 10 TO 15
PERCENT ALONG THE WAY FOR A
DESIGN PROCESS WITH CONCEPTUAL
WITH WITH THESE CONCEPTUAL
DESIGNS.
BUT IT WILL GIVE US A GOOD
ANSWER FOR THE TYPES
OF PRIORITIES AND THE TYPES
OF CONCERNS THAT WOULD BE ON
THESE ROADWAYS AND GET US READY
TO BE ABLE TO PICK UP AND
ADVANCE THE DESIGN FOR THOSE
ROADWAYS THAT ARE OF PARTICULAR
INTEREST.
>> THANKS SO MUCH.
I THINK MY TIME IS UP ON THIS
ONE COUNCIL RACKMAN, THANKS.
THANKS FOR RESPONDING TO THOSE
QUESTIONS.
I THINK YOU ANSWERED EVERYTHING
THAT WE COVERED AND I GUESS I
WANTED TO YOU KNOW, WE HAD ALSO
DISCUSSED EARLIER AMENDING THIS
CONTRACT TO INCORPORATE SETTING
TARGET DESIGN SPEEDS FOR
INTERACTIONS WITH VULNERABLE
ROAD USERS AND I UNDERSTAND
THAT YOU ALL CAN DO THAT
ADMINISTRATIVELY AND I JUST
WANTED TO EXTEND MY THANKS
FURTHER DISCUSSION GASMIER
BRINGS I JUST WANTED TO
ELABORATE WITH MY GRATITUDE.
>> WE HAD A REALLY LONG
PRODUCTIVE CONVERSATION WITH
STAFF TODAY AND I KNOW THAT
THEY HAVE BEEN CREATIVE
THINKING ABOUT HOW TO GET THIS
THIS CONTRACT OUT THERE TO TO
DO THE WORK THAT WE'RE
INTERESTED IN DOING AND MAKE
REALLY MEETS OUR COMMUNITY
NEEDS.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT DILIGENCE
FOR THE DISCUSSION ALL FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED.
>> WE NOW COME TO A SET
OF PUBLIC HEARINGS.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCIL AND THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
THE SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER
OF THE PUBLIC HEARING TO SPEAK
AT A PUBLIC HEARING ONE NEED
NOT HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE
BUT YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO
THE SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER
OF THE PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS
TO SAY THE SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE
AGENDA TO WHICH THE PUBLIC
HEARING RELATES TO SPEAKERS IN
ALL INSTANCES WILL HAVE THREE
MINUTES IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME WILL NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY
SECONDS REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME HAS EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME
HAS EXPIRED, PLEASE CONCLUDE
REMARKS AND CEDE THE FLOOR
PUBLIC ENEMY NUMBER ONE AN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION FIVE
THREE TO TWO OF CHAPTER FIFTY
FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE TITLE FIVE OF THE CODE THE
OF ANN ARBOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE WHO'D LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING
PROBLEM?
>> IS THERE ANY IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
MARY, I DON'T HAVE ANY CALLERS
ON LINE FOR THIS HEARING
.
SEE, NO ONE THIS PUBLIC HEARING
IS CLOSED PUBLIC HEARING NO TO
AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION
NINE ONE ZERO ONE NINE ONE ZERO
THREE NINE ONE ZERO FIVE NINE
ONE ZERO NINE OF CHAPTER FIFTY
A PROBLEM OF CHAPTER 11 FIRE
PREVENTION OF TITLE NINE OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY THE NRA.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
I DON'T HAVE ANYONE ONLINE FOR
THIS HEARING
.
SEE NO ONE THIS PUBLIC HEARING
IS CLOSED PUBLIC CARRY NUMBER
THREE AN ORDINANCE TO ADD
CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY UTILITY TO TITLE TO
UTILITIES AND SERVICES OF THE
CODE THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
THANK YOU MAYOR KENT GARBER
AGAIN, VERY GLAD TO SEE THE
CITY MOVING FORWARD.
I'M REALLY EAGER TO SEE
OPERATIONS BEGIN AND SOME
DECARBONIZATION ACTION ON THE
CITY WILL TAKE PLACE.
>> I'M GOING TO SPEAK BUT THE
ONLY I JUST I NOTICED IN THE IN
THE TEXT OF THE RESOLUTION IT
DIRECTS THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TO EVENTUALLY COME UP WITH A
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE FOR THE
SEIU.
>> I BELIEVE NOR DOES IT SET
SOME FAIRLY LENIENT DEADLINES
ON THAT.
I JUST WANT TO REMIND YOU THAT
THE FIVE PAGE ENERGY REPORT
FROM THE TWO YEAR AND A HALF
AGO NOW RECOMMENDED THAT ANY
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE FOR THE
SEIU BE STRUCTURED IN SUCH A
WAY THAT IT COULD FOLD INTO A
FUTURE MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC
UTILITY ONE BY THE CITY SHOULD
ONE COME INTO EXISTENCE IN THE
FUTURE.
AS YOU KNOW, THERE'S BEEN SOME
DISCUSSION ABOUT THAT
.
SO JUST A REMINDER THAT THAT
WAS A RECOMMENDATION FOR FIVE
WEEKS ENERGY AND THAT IN
DEVISING A GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE
THE SEIU OVER TIME THIS SHOULD
BE KEPT IN CONSIDERATION.
>> BUT I'M VERY HAPPY TO SEE
THIS ON THE AGENDA AND TO SEE
THIS MOVING FORWARD.
THANK THANK YOU.
IS ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE WHO'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING?
>> IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING
?
I DON'T HAVE ANY CALLERS ON
LINE FOR THIS HEARING
SEE NO ON
THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS CLOSED.
>> WE HAVE BEFORE US THE
REGULAR MEETING MINUTES
OF MARCH SEVENTEEN AND THE WORK
SESSION MINUTES OF MARCH TWENTY
FOUR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE I HAVE
A MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE
THESE MINUTES APPROVED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON SECONDED
BY COUNCILMAN BERGONZI.
I DON'T DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF THE MINUTES OF LABOR OPPOSED
THE MINUTES ARE APPROVED BE1 AN
ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION FIVE
THREE TO TWO OF CHAPTER FIFTY
FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE OF TITLE FIVE THE CODE OF
THE CITY THANJAVUR MOVE BY
COUNCILOR DISH SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF BE1 NON
BRITISH.
>> I SPOKE TO THIS FIRST
READING SO I WILL BE VERY
QUICK.
WE ARE ASKED TO APPROVE A
PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO THE UDC
THAT WILL MAKE IT LESS
BURDENSOME TO ALTERED NANKIN
FORMING STRUCTURES.
PEOPLE SOMETIMES MAKE THESE
KINDS OF ALTERATION PLANS TO
ACCOMMODATE GREATER RESIDENTIAL
DENSITY WHICH IS SOMETHING THE
CITY SEEKS TO PROMOTE
ALTERATIONS TO NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES FREQUENTLY COME
BEFORE THE ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS AND OVER THE PAST
TEN YEARS THE ZEBA HAS APPROVED
NEARLY ALL OF THEM.
>> WHAT SHOULD WE CONCLUDE FROM
THAT THAT THERE MAY BE A
MISALIGNMENT BETWEEN OUR
CURRENT STANDARD AND OUR
CURRENT PRACTICES AND
PRIORITIES?
WHY SHOULD WE HAVE PEOPLE
APPEARING AND BRINGING SIMILAR
CASES BEFORE BOARD THAT THE
BOARD APPROVES THAT SUGGESTS WE
SHOULD CHANGE THE ORDINANCE SO
THIS ORDINANCE CHANGE WILL
ELIMINATE COSTLY BURDENS THAT
RESIDENTS ENCOUNTER FOR DOING
THINGS LIKE ADDING HABITABLE
SPACE TO THEIR BASEMENTS.
IT WILL ALSO LIMIT UNNECESSARY
EXPENDITURES OF STAFF TIME.
>> SO I'LL BE VOTING FOR THESE
AMENDMENTS AND I WILL HOPE THAT
THEY ARE SUPPORTED BY THE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AND
RECOMMENDED FOR APPROVAL BY THE
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION FOR
THE DISCUSSION.
>> SORRY COUNCILOR AGMA THANK
YOU.
THANK YOU.
ZIBA IS GOING TO BE VERY HAPPY
ABOUT THIS AS I THINK I SPOKE
TO YOU LAST TIME BUT I ALSO
WANTED TO POINT OUT SOMETHING
IN ONE OF THE STAFF REPORTS
ABOUT THIS CHANGE IN TERMS
OF AFFECTED PERSONS THEY DID A
GEOSPATIAL REVIEW AND FOUND
THIS LET'S SEE PARCELS OF THE
PARCELS APPROXIMATELY SEVENTY
NINE PERCENT ARE NONCONFORMING
.
SO THAT MEANS THAT WE'RE TAKING
A VERY LARGE NUMBER
OF POTENTIAL PROJECTS THAT
WOULD HAVE REQUIRED ZEEB
APPROVAL AND ALLOWING PEOPLE TO
DO THAT WITHOUT THE OVERHEADS.
SO I THINK THIS IS A GOOD THING
EVERY TIME THESE THINGS COME
BEFORE THE ZIEBA AND THE TWO
YEARS THAT I'VE BEEN ON THE
LESIBA IT'S PRETTY PERFUNCTORY
BECAUSE EVERYONE PRETTY MUCH
AGREES THAT THESE THINGS AREN'T
REASONABLE IF THEY DON'T EXPAND
THE NONCONFORMITY.
>> SO LOOKING FORWARD TO THIS
FURTHER DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED B TO AN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION NINE
ONE ZERO ONE NINE ONE ZERO
THREE NINE ONE ZERO FIVE NINE
AND NINE ONE ZERO NINE A
CHAPTER ONE ELEVEN FIRE
PREVENTION OF TITLE NINE OF THE
CODE OF BANABA MAY MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA SECOND BY
COUNCIL MEMBER IA DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF BE2 ON FAVOR OPPOSED
IT IS APPROVED TO BE THREE AN
ORDINANCE TO ADD CHAPTER THIRTY
FIVE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY
TERRA TO TITLE TWO OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY BANABA MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER YES SECOND BY
COUNCILMAN AMALEK DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF B THREE
COUNTERMOVEMENT THANK YOU MAYOR
BETWEEN BOTH THIS ORDINANCE
ESTABLISH ESTABLISHING THE SIU
TONIGHT AND THE GAS FRANCHISE
ORDINANCE COMING UP NEXT ON THE
AGENDA I AM SUPER PROUD OF OUR
CITY, ITS RESIDENTS AND OUR
CITY STAFF WHO HAVE WORKED TO
GET US HERE.
WHILE THERE ARE QUITE A FEW
OPTIONS ON THE TABLE WHEN IT
COMES TO WORKING TOWARDS
CARBON NEUTRALITY, ONLY SOME
OF THESE ARE EFFECTIVE.
EVEN FEWER ARE FEASIBLE IN ANN
ARBOR AND YET EVEN FEWER ARE
ACTUALLY COST MANAGEABLE.
I BELIEVE THESE TWO ORDINANCES
FALL INTO THE CATEGORY
OF HITTING ALL THREE IF AN ARM
APPROACH TO THIS CRISIS THEY
TWO ZERO PLAN IS A PUZZLE.
THESE TWO ORDINANCES TONIGHT
ARE CENTRAL PIECES TO THAT
PUZZLE THAT IS SLOWLY BUT
SURELY COMING TOGETHER.
>> MOMENTUM HAS BEEN BUILDING
ON THE CLIMATE FRONT IN OUR
CITY AND I'M EXCITED TO SEE
WHAT BOTH OF THESE FIRST
OF THEIR KIND AND INNOVATIVE
ORDINANCES ACHIEVE THINGS FOR
THE DISCUSSION ARE TODAY IS A
IMPORTANT DAY IN THE HISTORY
OF ANN ARBOR.
IT IS PERHAPS THE FONDEST HOPE
OF A REPRESENTATIVE TO EARN THE
GRATITUDE OF FUTURE GENERATIONS
AND WITH THE CREATION OF THE
SUV AT THIS TABLE, TAKE THIS
TAKE SUCH AN ACTION, AN ACTION
WILL BENEFIT OUR COMMUNITY FOR
GENERATIONS THANKS TO COUNCIL'S
VOTE TODAY, THIS COMMUNITY'S
ACTION BY ITS VOTES AND
TREASURE IN NOVEMBER 22 AND
2024 AND CRUCIALLY AND
FOUNDATIONALLY THANKS TO THE
INGENUITY INITIATIVE AND DOGGED
WORK OF ANN ARBOR STAFF, WE
TODAY TAKE A CRUCIAL STEP
TOWARDS A CLEAN ENERGY FUTURE.
>> THE EU WILL DELIVER 100
PERCENT RENEWABLE, RELIABLE,
RESILIENT ENERGY WITHOUT
RAISING TAXES AND AT RATES THAT
WE BELIEVE TO BE COMPATIBLE
ALSO KNOWN AS COMPETITIVE WITH
THE EXISTING UTILITY, THE EU
WILL OFFER RESIDENTS CRUCIAL
ENERGY SERVICES.
IT WILL HELP WITH BENEFICIAL
ELECTRIFICATION.
IT WILL PUT ANN ARBOR AT THE
FOREFRONT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
FIGHT TO ACCOMPLISH AND REALIZE
OUR NECESSARY CARBON FREE
FUTURE.
>> IT IS A GREAT AND GOOD THING
FURTHER DISCUSSION ON FAVOR
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED
DC ONE
RESOLUTION TO AUTHORIZE THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO NEGOTIATE
PARTICIPATION IN C1 C1 STRIKE
THAT C1 AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND
CHAPTER 34 GRANT FRANCHISE AND
REPLACE IT WITH A NEW HEATING
FRANCHISE AND ADOPT A COMPANY
AGREEMENT REGARDING CLIMATE
ACTION MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
HIGHER SECOND BY COUNCILOR
CORNELL DISCUSSION PLEASE OF C1
MAYOR OH YES WE ARE HERE AT THE
REQUEST OF THE ADMINISTRATOR
FOR A SPECIAL INTRODUCTION.
I AM IMMENSELY PROUD TO STAND
AMONG THESE WOMEN WHO WERE MY
COLLEAGUES ORDERS FOR THIS
ORDINANCE.
>> I'M GOING TO TALK THE LEASE
BECAUSE THEY ARE EXPERTS AND
THEY WILL TELL YOU WHAT IT'S
ABOUT BUT LET ME START US OFF.
>> THANK YOU.
SO THE FRANCHISE A FRANCHISE IS
A CONTRACT.
>> IT IS A CONTRACT WITH A
PRIVATE UTILITY TO USE OUR
CITY'S RIGHTS WAY AND IN
EXCHANGE THEY GET THE PRIVILEGE
OF PROVIDING A UTILITY SERVICE
TO OUR RESIDENTS FOR A
SPECIFIED PERIOD OF TIME IN ANN
ARBOR THE GAS FRANCHISE WAS FOR
A PERIOD OF THIRTY YEARS.
>> IT WAS LAST SIGNED IN 1997
AND IT WAS SET TO EXPIRE IN
2027 ABOUT A YEAR AND A HALF
AGO LISTENING TO OUR RESIDENTS
COUNCIL DIRECTED THAT WE SHOULD
LOOK AT RENEGOTIATING THE
FRANCHISE.
IT WAS ABOUT TO COME TO AN END.
WE HAD EIGHT TO ZERO GOALS.
THERE WAS MUCH TO BE DONE.
THIS TEAM NEGOTIATED DTC AND IS
HERE TO PRESENT TO YOU TODAY
WHAT I THINK IS A GREAT
ACCOMPLISHMENT WE HAVE NOT BEEN
ABLE TO FIND IN THE COUNTRY
ANOTHER CITY THAT HAS BEEN ABLE
TO NEGOTIATE CLIMATE AND
CARBON REDUCTION GOALS IN A GAS
FRANCHISE.
I COULDN'T BE PROUDER TODAY
WITH THAT I'M GOING TO TURN IT
OVER WILL ACTUALLY LET ME
INTRODUCE MY COLLEAGUES.
WE HAVE VALERIE BRAIDER WHO IS
OUR OUTSIDE COUNSEL FROM
ROANOKE.
>> WE HAVE DR. STOOL'S WHO IS
THE DIRECTOR OF OVERSIGHT AND
THEN WE HAVE MET STEWART WHO IS
THE CHIEF OF STAFF OF PUBLIC
WORKS AND THEY'RE GOING TO WALK
YOU THROUGH THE FRANCHISE.
I WILL NOTE THAT IT IS A TEN
YEAR TERM BUT SINCE IT WAS
GOING TO EXPIRE IN 2027, IT IS
REALLY ONLY AN EIGHT YEAR
EXTENSION FROM THE ORIGINAL
FRANCHISE.
IT CLEARLY SIGNALED THAT THIS
COMMUNITY IS SERIOUS ABOUT
MOVING AWAY FROM CARBON .
DID SO ONE OF THE KEY FACTORS
AS ATTORNEY CA MENTIONED IS THE
FACT THAT THIS IN ADDITION TO
THE FRANCHISE THAT IS PART
OF THE ORDINANCE THERE IS AN
AGREEMENT REGARDING CLIMATE
ACTION THAT IS PART OF THIS PUT
TOGETHER AND THAT IS AS
WE
NOTED WE BELIEVE THE FIRST IN
THE COUNTRY TO DO THAT.
WHAT IT DOES IS IT REALLY
CREATES A PROCESS FOR CONTINUED
WORK AND A DECISION EVERY TWO
YEARS ABOUT WHAT ACTIONS THAT
CAN BE TAKEN TOGETHER.
SO IT'S NOT AN ATTEMPT BY US TO
THINK IN THE NEXT TEN YEARS,
FIVE YEARS NOW WE'LL DO EXACTLY
THIS SIX YEARS AND THEN HAVE
EVENTS OVERTAKE IT.
IT INSTEAD CREATES A PROCESS
WE'RE WORKING TOGETHER EVERY
TWO YEARS NEW ACTIONS ARE
IDENTIFIED.
NEW PROGRESS IS DECIDED ON AND
THAT THE PEOPLE AT THE TABLE
MAKING THOSE DECISIONS ALSO
HAVE THE AUTHORITY TO CARRY
THEM OUT.
SO IT'S NOT A SITUATION IN
WHICH YOU HAVE SOME FOLKS
NEGOTIATING DECIDING TO DO
THINGS AND THEN THEY'VE GOT TO
YOU KNOW, WHEN THEY'RE TRYING
TO CARRY THEM OUT, GET THE
AUTHORITY.
YOU'VE GOT THE FOLKS AT THE
TABLE THAT DEAL WITH THAT.
IT ALSO ENSURES THAT IF THERE
ARE DISAGREEMENTS WE HAVE A WAY
TO PUT THE TOP OF THE CITY WITH
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR WITH THE
TOP OF THE COMPANY.
THE PRESIDENT GETS TOGETHER TO
WORK IT OUT.
WE HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT THIS
WILL ALLOW A CONTINUING
DEVELOPMENT OF THE WORK THAT
CAN BE DONE TOGETHER AND WE'LL
BUILD THEREFORE ON THE PROGRESS
THAT HAS BEEN MADE AT EACH
TURN.
AND AS PART OF THIS WE ALSO HAD
A SITUATION WHERE WE'RE ABLE TO
WORK OUT WHAT THOSE FIRST TWO
YEARS OF ACTIVITIES WILL BE AND
FOR THAT I WILL TURN IT OVER TO
MY COLLEAGUES.
>> I KNOW YOU CANNOT SEE THE
SLIDES IS WORKING ON IT SO
APOLOGIES ON THAT FRONT FOR OUR
WORK PLAN.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF THINGS
THAT WE NEGOTIATED BECAUSE WE
KNOW ARE REALLY CRITICAL TO THE
WORK THAT WE DO.
ONE IS WE NEGOTIATED A JOINT
AGREEMENT AROUND ENERGY WASTE
REDUCTION OR ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND THAT INCLUDES DIRECT
FUNDING FOR RENTALS FOR OUR
RENTAL AND OUR LANDLORDS AS
WE'RE MOVING FORWARD TO TRY TO
DECARBONIZE A VERY HARD
DECARBONIZE SECTOR.
SO THERE'S GUARANTEED FUNDING
ACTUAL BRAND NEW DOLLARS THAT
COME INTO THE CITY TO HELP MAKE
THAT TRANSITION EASIER FOR
FOLK.
THERE'S ALSO A COMMITMENT THAT
IF THIS IS SUCCESSFUL LET ME
LET ME REPHRASE THAT WHEN THIS
IS SUCCESSFUL THIS WILL BECOME
AN OFFICIAL PROGRAM THAT WILL
BE OFFERED THROUGHOUT ALL
OF SERVICE TERRITORY.
WE ALSO HAVE A COMMITMENT
AROUND GEOTHERMAL.
WE NEED TO HAVE AN ALTERNATIVE
TO HOW WE ARE GOING TO
SUSTAINABLY HEAT AND COOL OUR
HOMES.
THIS IS A GAS UTILITY.
THEY CANNOT DO THINGS LIKE HEAT
PUMP PROGRAMS.
THEY CANNOT FUEL SWITCH.
SO WE HAD TO THINK ABOUT WHAT'S
THE ALTERNATIVE FOR THIS
PARTICULAR UTILITY AND THE
SERVICES THAT THEY PROVIDE.
AND FOR US WE'VE MADE A PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT COMMITMENT TO
GEOTHERMAL SHARED GEOTHERMAL
SYSTEMS IN PARTICULAR.
AND SO THEY HAVE AGREED TO
BRING FUNDING TO THE TABLE FOR
THE BRYANT PROJECT.
NOW IT AT ONE POINT WE THOUGHT
THAT WOULD BE THIRTY MILLION.
THE ANSWER HAS TURNED INTO
WHATEVER THE NUMBER IS THAT WE
NEED FOR THAT PROJECT SO WE
DON'T HAVE A CAP AS LONG AS
IT'S FINANCIALLY VIABLE.
AND MORE THAN THAT THEY'VE ALSO
AGREED TO BID ON A SECOND
PROJECT.
THERE WAS NO GUARANTEE THEY WIN
THAT PROJECT.
THEY HAVE AGREED TO COME IN IN
A GOOD FAITH OFFER TO HELP US
MOVE THAT THIS IS REALLY
SIGNIFICANT FOR ANN ARBOR BUT
IT IS ALSO REALLY SIGNIFICANT
FOR THE ENTIRE ENTIRE SERVICE
TERRITORY BECAUSE IF THEY
FIGURE OUT HOW TO DO GEOTHERMAL
THAT MEANS THEY OFFER
GEOTHERMAL TO MORE PLACES.
THIS IS HOW WE SEE THAT
TRANSITION THAT WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT.
WELL, YOU HAVE HALF YOUR SLIDES
COMING ONLINE.
THIS IS GREAT.
A FEW OTHER QUICK THINGS TO
NOTE.
WE HAVE ALSO BEEN LOOKING AT A
BIO DIGESTER AT OUR WASTEWATER
RECOVERY FACILITY.
WE'VE DONE A NUMBER OF STUDIES
AND WE'RE AT A POINT WHERE WE
NEED HELP TO UNDERSTAND THE
VIABILITY OF MOVING THAT
OFFICIALLY FORWARD.
THANKFULLY THEY HAVE AGREED TO
WORK WITH US TO SEEK THE
FUNDING AND TO PROVE THE
VIABILITY OF THIS PROJECT AND
TO HELP US IF IT IS VIABLE
BRING IT ON ONLINE BY TWENTY
THIRTY FIVE.
WE ALSO RECOGNIZE THAT THE WORK
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT NEEDS TO
BE DONE WITH DIGNITY WITH
PEOPLE WHO HAVE GOOD PAYING
FAMILY SUSTAINING JOBS.
IT WON'T WORK IF WE TAKE PEOPLE
OUT OF THE FOSSIL GAS INDUSTRY
AND DON'T LEAVE THEM AN
OPPORTUNITY TO TRANSITION.
SO WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON A
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY
WITH OUR LOCAL TRADE UNIONS AND
THERE IS FUNDING IN THIS TO
HELP IMPLEMENT THAT TO MAKE
SURE THAT PEOPLE DO NOT LOSE
THEIR JOBS BUT ARE SKILLED TO
TRANSITION TO A DECARBONIZED
WORKFORCE.
THAT'S ALSO EXCITING TO MAKE
SURE OUR PRIVATE SECTOR IS
READY TO SUPPORT US AND THEN
THIS LAST PIECE MAY NOT FEEL
THAT SIGNIFICANT ON PAPER BUT
IS ENORMOUSLY SIGNIFICANT.
WE SPEND A LOT OF TIME IN
REGULATORY PROCEEDINGS ON THIS
SIDE OF THIS COUNTER HERE.
THEN ONE OF THE THINGS WE'VE
BEEN FIGHTING FOR IS WE NEED TO
REPAIR INFRASTRUCTURE AS
OPPOSED TO REPLACE
INFRASTRUCTURE AS LONG AS YOU
CAN DO THAT SAFELY, THE REASON
IS IT'S MORE AFFORDABLE.
PLUS WE THINK THAT WE'RE ONLY
GOING TO BE ON THE SYSTEM FOR A
PERIOD OF TIME SO WE DON'T WANT
LEGACY INFRASTRUCTURE.
IT'S GOING TO LAST FIFTY TO
SEVENTY FIVE YEARS.
WE DON'T WANT TO LEAVE PEOPLE
HOLDING A BAG FOR THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO WE HAVE FOUGHT AND I WANT TO
GIVE A NEGOTIATING TEAM A LOT
OF CREDIT.
THEY CAME TO THE TABLE VERY
SINCERELY ESPECIALLY ON ALL
THESE TOPICS BUT ESPECIALLY
THIS ONE AND SAID WE UNDERSTAND
WE ARE WILLING ON WORKING WITH
YOU TO GIVE SIGHT LINES ON WHY
WE THINK WE HAVE TO REPLACE
SOMETHING VERSUS REPAIR IT AND
WE WILL TRY TO REPAIR WHATEVER
WE CAN AS OPPOSED TO REPLACE
THIS IS NOT STANDARD UTILITY
PRACTICE.
THERE'S ALSO SOME OTHER THINGS
IN HERE LIKE DECARBONIZING OUR
OWN CITY FACILITIES.
BUT THE WORK PLAN AGAIN IS
NEGOTIATED EVERY TWO YEARS AND
SO IT WILL CONTINUE TO MOVE AS
WE MOVE FORWARD AND HAVE BETTER
SIGHTLINES ON WHAT COMES NEXT
AND A FEW MORE THINGS ON THE
WORK PLAN IT COMMITS TO
QUARTERLY MEETINGS WITH BETWEEN
DTI GAS AND THE PUBLIC SERVICES
TEAM TO REVIEW PLANS UPCOMING
PROJECTS DISCUSS POSSIBLE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR PROJECT
COORDINATION OR ALIGNMENT AND
DISCUSS ANY ISSUES WITH ONGOING
PROJECTS OCCURRING IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY.
WITH THESE RECURRING MEETINGS
WE ARE SEEKING BETTER
COLLABORATION AND BETTER
INFRASTRUCTURE DATA SHARING.
ADDITIONALLY, WE HOPE TO IT
WILL ENSURE A DIG PLANTS
APPROACH WHENEVER POSSIBLE TO
REDUCE COST COSTS MINIMIZE
DISRUPTION TO RESIDENTS AND
DECREASE THE RISK OF DAMAGE TO
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE.
THROUGH THESE MEETINGS WE WILL
REPORT WE WILL REVIEW REPORTS
OF DAMAGE INCLUDING CROSSPOINT
THROUGH SEWERS WHICH CAN HAPPEN
AND TRACK REPAIRS ARE NEEDED
RESTORATION FOR COMPLETED
PROJECTS ALSO AGREES TO WORK
WITH US TO ADDRESS SOME
INFORMATION PAIN POINTS THAT
WE'VE EXPERIENCED FOR THE CITY
ESPECIALLY RELATED TO ZERO
REPORTING AND THE COMMERCIAL
AND MULTIFAMILY ENERGY AND
WATER BENCHMARKING
REQUIREMENTS.
AND ADDITIONALLY THEY'VE ALSO
AGREED TO PROVIDE THE CITY WITH
GREATER INSIGHTS INTO SOME
OF THE KEY AREAS OF COMPLAINTS
FOR RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS IN
THE CITY SO WE CAN UNDERSTAND
THOSE BETTER.
THAT IS THE FRANCHISE.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO SHARE A LITTLE BIT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
DISCUSSION OF C1 COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIAN.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THAT
PRESENTATION.
I WANT TO SPEAK IN STRONG
SUPPORT OF THE NEW HEATING
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT WITH DTI
AND TO ALSO NAME WHAT A BIG
DEAL THIS IS FOR THE CITY I HAD
THE PRIVILEGE OF SERVING ON THE
WORKING GROUP THAT ADVISED OUR
NEGOTIATING TEAM DURING THIS
PROCESS AND WHAT THEY'VE
ACHIEVED AND WHAT WE'VE
ACHIEVED TOGETHER IS MOMENTOUS
NOT JUST FOR ANN ARBOR BUT AS A
MODEL FOR CITIES ACROSS
MICHIGAN AND ACROSS THE COUNTRY
WHO ARE SERIOUS ABOUT CLIMATE
ACTION GOING INTO IT.
THE QUESTION WAS COULD WE USE
THIS RARE OPPORTUNITY A UTILITY
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT THAT WAS
EXPIRING TO MAKE REAL PROGRESS
TOWARD OUR CLIMATE GOALS?
THAT'S NOT HOW FRANCHISE
AGREEMENTS USUALLY WORK.
MOST ARE THIRTY YEARS LONG IF
THEY GET RENEWED WITH LITTLE
FANFARE AND THEY DON'T REFLECT
ANY OF THE CHALLENGES OR VALUES
THAT WE'RE GRAPPLING WITH
TODAY, ESPECIALLY WHEN IT COMES
TO CLIMATE.
BUT HERE IN ANN ARBOR WE
DECIDED TO TRY SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
THE RESULT IS AN AGREEMENT THAT
PUTS US ON A MUCH STRONGER
PATH.
IT'S A TEN YEAR TERM THROUGH
TWENTY THIRTY FIVE WITH NO
AUTOMATIC RENEWAL.
THAT ALONE GIVES US MORE
LEVERAGE THAN WE'VE EVER HAD
BEFORE.
BUT WE ALSO SECURED ANNUAL
PUBLIC REPORTING ON GAS USAGE
IN THE CITY SO WE CAN MEASURE
AND RESPOND TO TRENDS A SHARED
COMMITMENT TO ELECTRIFICATION
AND DECARBONIZATION, A
FRAMEWORK FOR COLLABORATION TO
SUPPORT RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES AS THEY MOVE OFF GAS
TRAINING TO FACILITATE A JUST
TRANSITION FOR WORKERS AND A
CLEAR EXPECTATION THAT ANY
FUTURE AGREEMENT MUST ALIGN
WITH THE CITIES ADOPTED ENERGY
AND CLIMATE PLANS INCLUDING OUR
GOAL TO BECOME FOSSIL FREE.
THIS ISN'T JUST SOME SYMBOLIC
IT GIVES TOOLS TO GATHER DATA,
ENGAGE THE PUBLIC AND HOLD DTA
ACCOUNTABLE IN WAYS THAT
WEREN'T POSSIBLE UNDER OUR OLD
AGREEMENT WE DIDN'T GET
EVERYTHING AND WE DIDN'T EITHER
BUT WE ENDED UP WITH SOMETHING
THAT LAYS THE GROUNDWORK FOR A
JUST COMMUNITY DRIVEN ENERGY
TRANSITION.
AND I WANT TO BE CLEAR THIS
DIDN'T HAPPEN BY ACCIDENT.
IT HAPPENED BECAUSE A CITY
STAFF AND OUR EXPERT OUTSIDE
ATTORNEYS GOT CREATIVE AND THEY
STUCK WITH IT.
>> IT HAPPENED BECAUSE OUR
NEGOTIATING TEAM PUSHED FOR
MORE.
>> I ALSO WANT TO EMPHASIZE
THAT THIS SETS A PRECEDENT.
IT SHOWS THAT CITIES CAN
NEGOTIATE WITH UTILITIES AND
GET MEANINGFUL RESULTS.
WE ARE NOT POWERLESS.
WE CAN MOVE AWAY FROM OUTDATED
MODELS AND TOWARD CLEANER, MORE
ACCOUNTABLE ENERGY FUTURE.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH TO CITY
STAFF TO THE NEGOTIATING TEAM,
MY FELLOW WORKING GROUP MEMBERS
AND ALL OF THE RESIDENTS AND
ADVOCATES AND EXPERTS WHO
HELPED GET US HERE.
>> THIS IS A COLLECTIVE WIN AND
IT'S SOMETHING WE CAN ALL BE
PROUD OF FOR THE DISCUSSION I
WOULD LIKE TO SECOND EVERYTHING
THE COUNCIL MEMBER HAS SAID.
THIS IS A AN EXCELLENT STEP
FORWARD.
IT IS A STEP FORWARD THAT WE
WERE ABLE TO TAKE AS A RESULT
OF A COMMITTED COMMUNITY
COUNCIL MEMBERS WHO SHOW UP AND
STAFF WHO HAS THE VISION TO
IDENTIFY IDENTIFY OPPORTUNITIES
AND TO SEIZE THEM.
THE GAS FRANCHISE WHICH WILL BE
FORGED AT OUR AT OUR SECOND
MEETING AT OUR NEXT CYCLE IT
WILL IMPROVE OUR ROADS.
IT WILL SAVE THE MUNICIPAL
ORGANIZATION MONEY.
IT WILL SAVE INFRASTRUCTURE.
IT WILL IMPROVE SERVICE TO TO
RESIDENTS AND IT WILL ENABLE US
WITH WITH COOPERATION FROM FROM
THE UTILITY TO REDUCE CARBON .
>> I AM PARTICULARLY EXCITED
ABOUT ABOUT DTES WILLINGNESS TO
WORK WITH US WITH RESPECT TO
IMPLEMENTING DISTRICT
GEOTHERMAL.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT YOU
KNOW, I THINK WE ALL HOPE WILL
BE THE YOU KNOW, GAS COMPANY'S
FUTURE.
A GAS COMPANY IS A HEATING
COMPANY AND JUST A THERMAL
DISTRICT.
GEOTHERMAL IS HEATING
AND IF WE
CAN WE CAN BE A PART OF THEIR
STRUCTURAL TRANSITION TO TO
THAT SERVICE THAT'S JUST
AMAZING.
>> LOOKING FORWARD TO TODAY
FIRST READING A NEXT MEETING,
SECOND READING FOR THE
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OPPOSED IT
IS APPROVED AT DC ONE
RESOLUTION TO AUTHORIZE THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR TO NEGOTIATE
CITY PARTICIPATION IN THE ANN
ARBOR S PROJECT INCLUDING
POTENTIALLY OWNING, OPERATING
AND BONDING FOR PARKING DECKS
MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER DECISION
BY COUNCIL MEMBER IA DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF DC ONE MR. DELACOURT
MAYOR MR. DELLACQUA IS JOINING
FUNDO
AND INVESTEMENT.
>> YES WELCOME.
THANK YOU MR. MAYOR.
I DID RECEIVE TWO QUESTIONS
REGARDING THE AGENDA ITEM PRIOR
TO THE PREVIOUSLY POSTPONED
MEETING.
THE FIRST IS WHERE DO WHERE DO
EXCESS TIP FUNDS COME FROM IF
THE TEST WILL TERMINATE ONCE
ALL ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES ARE
PAID PAID OFF IT SEEMS THERE IS
NO OPPORTUNITY FOR EXCESS
FUNDS.
>> IF I'M UNDERSTANDING THE
GENERAL RESPONSE MUCH MORE
CORRECTLY, YES, TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT IF IF THERE IS AVAILABLE
TESTS OVER THE LIFETIME OF A
PROJECT THAT DOES NOT HAVE AN
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY ASSIGNED TO
IT THEN THERE WILL BE TESTS
THAT IS UNUTILIZED IN
RELATIONSHIP TO THE PROJECT.
IT IS NOT ACCESSED, IT DOES NOT
GET COLLECTED AND SET IN AN
ACCOUNT AWAITING FOR AN
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY TO BE
ASSIGNED TO IT.
IT IS JUST UNAVAILABLE AT SOME
POINT DURING THE LIFE OF A PLAN
A PLAN CAN BE AMENDED TO ADD
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES TO UTILIZE
THAT TEST BUT IT IS ONLY
CREATED ONCE AN ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITY IS APPROVED CONDUCTED
,INSPECTED AND THEN THAT
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY IS
REIMBURSED.
SO THERE IS NOT NECESSARILY
QUOTE UNQUOTE EXCESS.
THERE IS SOME TIMES TESTS FROM
A PROJECT THAT IS UNUTILIZED
BECAUSE THERE IS EITHER NOT
ENOUGH ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES OR
THERE IS A CHOICE MADE OUT TO
REIMBURSE EVERYTHING THAT IS
ELIGIBLE.
>> THE SECOND QUESTION IS IN
THE EVENT THERE ARE ANY ACCESS
TO FUNDS, IS IT CORRECT THAT
THEY WOULD ONLY BECOME
AVAILABLE ONCE ALL OTHER
ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES ARE PAID
OFF LIKELY TOWARDS THE END
OF THE 30 YEAR BOND PERIOD?
AM I AM I CONCERNED THAT ANY
INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES TO THIS
AREA COULD BE LAID DELAY TWENTY
PLUS YEARS OR IN INDEFINITELY
IF NO SURPLUS FUNDS ARE
ACTUALLY VIABLE AGAIN THIS KIND
OF GOES TO THE FIRST QUESTION
THERE REALLY IS NOT ANY EXCESS
FUNDS.
WHAT THERE ARE IS FUNDS THAT
ARE UNASSIGNED CURRENTLY WITHIN
THE PROJECT THAT'S BEING
DISCUSSED ALL AVAILABLE TIFE AS
ESTIMATED OVER THE THIRTY YEAR
LIFE OF THE PLAN HAS BEEN
ASSIGNED TO AN ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITY SO CURRENTLY THE PLAN
IS STRUCTURED ALL OF THE
AVAILABLE TESTS THAT WILL BE
CREATED OR ESTIMATED FROM THE
PROJECT OVER THE LIFESPAN OF IT
HAS BEEN ASSIGNED A
CORRESPONDING ELIGIBLE ACTIVITY
IF FOR SOME REASON MORE TEST IS
CREATED DURING THE LIFETIME
OF THE PLAN AND THOSE ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITIES ARE PAID OFF WITH
THAT ADDITIONAL TIFE ABOVE
ESTIMATE THERE COULD BE AN
AMENDMENT TO THE PLAN THAT
ASSIGNED ADDITIONAL ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITIES FOR UTILIZATION
UTILIZATION OF THAT TEST OR IN
WHAT IS MORE LIKELY AND WHAT
HAS HAPPENED.
I THINK WITH EVERY PLAN
APPROVED OVER THE LAST SEVERAL
YEARS THE PLAN ACTUALLY PAYS
OFF ALL THE ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES
EARLY.
THE PLAN IS THEN CEASE TO EXIST
AND ALL THE TAXES GO BACK TO
THEIR NORMAL JURISDICTIONS.
SO I THINK THAT ANSWERS THE TWO
QUESTIONS AND OBVIOUSLY I AM
HERE TO ANSWER ANYTHING
ADDITIONAL IF NECESSARY.
THANK YOU.
FURTHER DISCUSSION
COUNCILOR
BRITISH I'M SORRY I THEN THESE
ANSWERS ARE GREAT BUT AN
EARLIER MEMO THAT WE RECEIVED
SUGGESTED THAT THERE WAS
UNASSIGNED TEPHRA VANU THAT
COULD BE PUT TOWARD REBUILDING
SANITARY SEWER CAPACITY IN THAT
AREA.
>> HAS THAT ESTIMATE CHANGED
AND IS IT NOW THE CASE THAT
THERE IS NO OR SORRY WHAT
HAPPENED TO THAT?
>> UNDERSTOOD THE REASON I SAY
THAT ALL OF THE AVAILABLE IS
ASSIGNED IS BECAUSE POST THAT
MEMO IT WAS DETERMINED THAT THE
I'M NOT ASSIGNED TO IT WAS NOT
ASSIGNED TO A KNOWLEDGEABLE
ACTIVITY SHOULD BE ASSIGNED TO
THOSE STORMWATER IMPROVEMENTS
AND SANITARY PERMITS PUBLIC
INFRASTRUCTURE WHICH IS
ALLOWABLE UNDER THE PLAN AND
THAT THOSE ADDITIONAL REVENUES
OVER THE LIFE PLAN HAVE NOW
BEEN CONNECTED TO AN ELIGIBLE
ACTIVITY UTILIZING THEM OVER
THE LIFE OF THE PLANT.
>> SO THAT IS A CHANGE SINCE
THAT MEMO WENT TO THANK YOU.
THAT'S GREAT.
THAT'S A CHANGE.
BUT IT VERIFIES WHAT HAS BEEN
CLAIMED ABOUT THE PROJECT WHICH
IS THAT IT COULD HELP US FUND
THE REBUILDING OF THE SANITARY
SEWER CAPACITY.
>> SO THAT'S TERRIFIC.
THANK YOU.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
FURTHER DISCUSSION, COUNCILOR
WATSON, I HAVE A QUESTION THAT
I BELIEVE CAN BE ANSWERED BY
THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM
ACKNOWLEDGING OF COURSE THAT
THE CITY HAS OUR OWN ON COUNCIL
WITH ONGOING TARIFFS AND MARKET
TURMOIL.
HOW ARE YOU AT CRAWFORD ORING
THINKING ABOUT RISK TO THE
PROJECT AND BY EXTENSION TO THE
CITY
YOU'RE COLLEGE.
IT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
COUNCIL MEMBER.
THE REALITY IS AT THE BEGINNING
OF EVERY CONSTRUCTION PROJECT
WE ENTER INTO GROSS MAXIMUM
PRICE CONTRACTS WITH OUR
GENERAL CONTRACTORS.
SOME OF THOSE CONTRACTS WILL
LIKELY HAVE FORCE MAJEURE
CLAUSES IN THEM AND SOME
PROTECTIONS IN FAVOR OF THE
GENERAL CONTRACTOR FOR SURPRISE
EVENTS THAT ACTS OF GOD SO TO
SPEAK.
BUT IN THE CASE OF THE CURRENT
ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT, I THINK
THE BEST ANSWER TO YOUR
QUESTION IS NEGOTIATING
CONTRACTUAL PROTECTIONS FOR
PRICE CONTROL AT THE TIME THAT
WE BEGIN CONSTRUCTION THE THE
TURMOIL THE MARKET AS IT
RELATES TO THE TARIFFS
SPECIFICALLY IS ONE THAT WE'RE
TRACKING VERY CLOSELY AND I
THINK SOMETHING WORTH NOTE WE
CERTAINLY HAVE CONCERNS.
IT'S OUR BUSINESS AND WE HAVE
LOTS OF CONCERNS AS MANY DO IN
THE MARKETPLACE CURRENT
CURRENTLY HOWEVER, IN MOST
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS MATERIALS
REPRESENT ROUGHLY 50 PERCENT
OF THE HARD COST THE PROJECT
AND AS IT RELATES TO THE HARD
COST, HARD COST REPRESENTS
ROUGHLY TWO THIRDS OF TOTAL
COST OF THE PROJECT.
>> SO EVEN IF ALL OF THE
MATERIALS IN THE PROJECT WERE
SUBJECT TO SIGNIFICANT
INCREASES IN TARIFFS, WE'RE NOT
TALKING ABOUT SIGNIFICANT
INCREASES TO EVERY ASPECT
OF THE CONSTRUCTION COST.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT IT'S NOT
MEANINGFUL.
I THINK ANYTHING IN EXCESS OF A
COUPLE OF PERCENTAGE POINT
SWING IN ANY GIVEN CONSTRUCTION
PROJECT CAN BE VERY MEANINGFUL
AND WOULD BE VERY MEANINGFUL TO
THE CITY.
BUT I I DO THINK IT'S WORTH
NOTING THAT THE COST OF TARIFFS
IS NOT THE ONLY THING THAT GOES
INTO CONSIDERATION WITH RESPECT
TO BUDGETING FOR THESE THINGS.
AND AGAIN CONTRACTUAL
PROTECTIONS WILL EXIST AT THE
TIME OF BEGINNING THE PROJECT
AND TYING THIS THIS DISCUSSION
TOGETHER WITH ONE THAT WAS
BROUGHT UP AT THE LAST WORK
SESSION.
THAT'S ALSO PART OF THE BENEFIT
OF PHASING A PROJECT LIKE THIS
IN KEEPING WITH PACKAGING
TOGETHER PORTIONS OF THE
PROJECT THAT FIT NEATLY AND
ENSURE THAT WE HAVE ACCURATE
PRICING AS OF THE TIME THAT WE
START EACH SUBSEQUENT PHASE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
FURTHER DISCUSSION MR NO I JUST
WANTED TO POINT OUT WHEN WHEN
THIS PARTICULAR ITEM WAS
SCHEDULED WE HAD NOT YET
SCHEDULED A WORK SESSION ON THE
SEVENTEENTH SO
ON THE SAME
NIGHT THAT MORROW WILL COME
BACK TO TALK ABOUT D-DAY SO THE
17TH WILL BE AVAILABLE TO
RESPOND TO QUESTIONS THAT WE
RECEIVE AND THROUGH SARAH
BETWEEN NOW AND THEN COUNCILOR
BRINGS YEAH.
>> THANK YOU KIND OF IT IN
REGARDS TO THAT, I THINK ONE
OF MY CONCERNS ABOUT THIS
RESOLUTION IS THAT IT DOES A
LOT IN THERE'S IT'S OBVIOUSLY
ALLOWING US TO ENTER INTO THE
NEXT STAGES OF NEGOTIATIONS BUT
IT ALSO INSTRUCTS THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO BRING BACK DO
THOSE NEXT STEPS IN TERMS
OF BOND ISSUANCE TO BRING
SOMETHING BACK TO US FOR A VOTE
AND THEN ALSO ON THE SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT STARTING OBVIOUSLY
WHERE WE I KNOW WE ALL HAVE
SOME QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS AND
THAT'S WHY THERE'S NOT ALL
THERE'S A WORK SESSION NEXT
WEEK AND SO A FEW OF THOSE
PIECES
I FEEL LIKE ARE WE'RE
GETTING A LITTLE BIT AHEAD
OF OURSELVES.
>> YES, THERE IS A LOT TO BE
ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT THIS
PROJECT.
RIGHT.
THERE'S THERE'S IT'S EXCITING
TO SEE A THOUSAND UNITS OF OF
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPOSED IN
THE CITY AND 210 AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS AND THE LEVEL
OF INVESTMENT THAT'S BEING
PROPOSED I THINK THAT I'M GOING
TO HEAR LATER ON PROBABLY A LOT
OF EXCITEMENT ABOUT THAT AND I
KNOW THAT WE HAVE BEEN
ANTICIPATING THIS AND TAKE ONE
AND IT'S IT'S EXCITING AND WE
HEAR THE ENTHUSIASM FROM THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM AROUND WHAT'S
POSSIBLE HERE.
MY CONCERNS AROUND THIS AS
FOLKS KNOW REALLY INVOLVE OUR
PUBLIC INVESTMENT IN THIS
PROJECT AND I THINK WE REALLY
IT'S OUR IT'S OUR DUTY TO BE
ASKING TOUGH QUESTIONS ABOUT
THIS.
THIS WAS PROPOSED TO BE THE
LARGEST BROWNFIELD PROPOSAL IN
CITY HISTORY.
WE OBVIOUSLY DON'T HAVE IT A
PLAN THAT'S APPROVED IN FRONT
OF US TEN TIMES LARGER THAN
WHAT WE'VE DONE BEFORE.
IT ALSO SUGGESTS THAT WE WOULD
CREATE A NEW PARKING AUTHORITY
FOR THE CITY OF WHICH WE HAVE
NO SORT OF PLANNING AROUND
THAT.
BUT IT'S REQUIRING US YOU KNOW,
THAT'S THAT'S WHERE I SEE A BIT
OF THE HANDCUFF WITH THIS
PROJECT.
>> RIGHT.
IT'S A 30 YEAR COMMITMENT TO
THIS PROJECT.
>> SO IT'S NOT THAT YOU KNOW,
WE HEARD ABOUT THE RISK AROUND
THIS PROJECT FOR THE DEVELOPER
THOSE CONTRACTUAL PROTECTIONS
WE DON'T HAVE THOSE YET.
WE WERE ASKED TO, YOU KNOW, GO
INTO THIS PURCHASE PLAN FROM
THE DEVELOPMENT FOR ELEVEN
POINT FOUR DOLLARS MILLION THEN
ISSUE AS A CITY GENERAL
OBLIGATION BONDS FOUR HUNDRED
AND FORTY SIX MILLION DOLLARS
AND THEN WE ALL HOPE THAT
THERE'S SUCCESS IN THIS IF IT
MOVES FORWARD.
BUT THE PAYBACK OF THOSE BONDS
IS TWO AND THIRTY 34 MILLION
DOLLARS.
RIGHT.
AND FOR THIS LEVEL OF PUBLIC
INVESTMENT >> WE'RE NOT
NECESSARILY WE'RE NOT REALLY
SEEING WE'RE SEEING MORE
HOUSING BUT WE'RE NOT SEEING
HOUSING THAT'S ALIGNED WITH OUR
OTHER VALUES AND GOALS.
RIGHT.
WE JUST EXCITEDLY APPROVED THIS
NEW GAS FRANCHISE AND TALKED
ABOUT HOW WE ARE GOING TO BE
WEANING OURSELVES OFF OF GAS.
HOWEVER, THESE THOUSAND PLUS
UNITS ARE NOT SUPPOSED TO BE
GAS FREE OR EVEN CONSTRUCTED TO
MAKE THAT TRANSITION.
>> AS FAR AS I'M AWARE,
HOWEVER, THIS IS STILL A
CONCEPT SO NOTHING'S IN FRONT
OF US NOW MAYBE SOMETHING
THAT'LL BE PUT FORTH IN FRONT
OF US WILL SUGGEST A REALLY
STRONG ENVIRONMENTALLY
CONSCIOUS DEVELOPMENT FOR THIS
THREE HUNDRED MILLION DOLLARS
OF PUBLIC INVESTMENT AND THEN
THAT MIGHT BE SOMETHING THAT I
COULD RALLY BEHIND BUT RIGHT
NOW I'M ASKED TO RALLY BEHIND
US BUILDING THE PARKING
STRUCTURE TO ALSO HAVE A
COMMITMENT TO FOR THE NEXT
THIRTY YEARS COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH.
THIS PROJECT IS THE FIRST TO
TAKE UP TRANSIT CORRIDOR
ZONING.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE ALL RAN
ON AND MANY PEOPLE VOTED FOR US
BECAUSE THEY SUPPORTED IT AND
THE VISION OF T7 ZONING IS SO
SIMPLE PAVE THE PARKING LOT AND
CREATE HOUSING AND LIVING SPACE
FOR PEOPLE.
>> BUT REALIZING THIS VISION IS
HARD, IT'S HARDER THAN MANY
OF US AND OUR SUPPORTERS EXPECT
IT.
SO IT IS UNDERSTANDABLE THAT WE
MAY NOT HAVE REALIZED HOW MUCH
WOULD BE ASKED OF US TO MAKE IT
REAL BECAUSE YOU DON'T JUST
PLUNK DOWN HOUSING ON PARKING
LOTS AS YOU WOULD ON A MONOPOLY
BOARD.
YOU HAVE TO BUILD
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SURE TO MAKE HOUSING EXCUSE ME
PARKING LOTS INTO LIVABLE
SPACES AND WHEN YOU TAKE A
PARKING LOT THAT IS CURRENTLY
USED BY HUNDREDS OF WORKERS AND
CONVERT IT INTO HOUSING, YOU
NEED TO GIVE THEM SOME PLACE TO
PARK.
>> INFRASTRUCTURE CREATION
NEEDS PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
INVESTMENT.
>> AND WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE
IN THIS CASE?
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS HAS
ALREADY SPOKEN ABOUT IT THIS
PROJECT WILL BE THE LARGEST
BROWNFIELD PROPOSAL IN THE
CITY'S HISTORY AROUND 300
MILLION AM I WHAT?
>> OH SORRY.
SORRY.
IN PUBLIC MONEY BUT THE PRIVATE
INVESTMENT DOLLARS TOTAL MORE
THAN THAT AT FOUR 69 MILLION.
SO WE'VE HIRED AN ANALYST PR
FIRM TO REVIEW THIS FINANCIAL
COMMITMENT.
PFM WORKS FOR CITIES MAKE SURE
THAT THEY DON'T LOSE THEIR
MONEY, MAKE SURE THAT THEY
AREN'T INVESTING MORE THAN IS
REASONABLE.
>> ITS FINDINGS ARE FAVORABLE
IF WE WANT TO GO FURTHER INTO
THE DETAILS OF THIS INVESTMENT
,WE NEED TO START INVESTING
STAFF TIME, MUCH MORE STAFF
TIME THAN WE HAVE ALREADY AND
THAT'S WITH THIS RESOLUTION
ASKS US TO AUTHORIZE MR DE HONI
TO DO I THINK WHAT WE NEED TO
CONSIDER TO AUTHORIZE IS ABOUT
AUTHORIZING THAT AUTHORIZATION
STEP.
I HAVE TOO MANY AUTHORIZATION
IN THAT SENTENCE BUT IS WHAT
INVESTING IN THIS PROJECT WOULD
BRING TO THE CITY AND IT IS
1000 UNITS OUTSIDE OF DOWNTOWN
IT IS 250 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
APARTMENTS AND IT ALSO IS THE
EQUIVALENT OF A PAYMENT IN
LIEU.
NORMALLY WE HAVE TO CHOOSE
BETWEEN THOSE THINGS.
DO YOU WANT THE UNITS OR DO YOU
WANT PAYMENT?
>> BUT THIS PROJECT IS OFFERING
TO TO CONSTRUCT THE UNITS
GUARANTEE PAYBACK OF THE
CONSTRUCTION LOAN AND PAY THE
MORTGAGE UNTIL THE CITY TAKES
IT OVER.
>> NO.
YES.
OK, I WILL SPEAK AGAIN LATER.
>> THIS ACTUALLY WAS YOUR
SECOND TIME WAS IT ON THIS I
THOUGHT YOU ASKED A QUESTION
YOU OH I DID OK MY REGRETS
COUNCIL MEMBER AYA OK THANK YOU
SO I WANT TO EXPLAIN WHY FROM
EVERYTHING I KNOW SO FAR I
BELIEVE THAT THIS IS A SMART
AND RESPONSIBLE INVESTMENT FOR
OUR CITY AND ALSO TO ADDRESS
SOME CONCERNS THAT I'VE HEARD
FROM CONSTITUENTS AND AND
COLLEAGUES.
SO FIRST LET'S TALK ABOUT THE
FINANCING.
EVERY FINANCING MODEL COMES
WITH ASSUMPTIONS AND YES, WE
SHOULD ALWAYS SCRUTINIZE BUT
WHAT'S JUST AS IMPORTANT IS HOW
WE STRUCTURE RISK AND IN THIS
CASE THE BOND REPAYMENT IS
DESIGNED TO COME SOLELY FROM
THE NEW TAX REVENUE GENERATED
BY THE DEVELOPMENT ITSELF.
THIS MEANS THE CITY'S GENERAL
FUND AND THE EXISTING TAXPAYER
DOLLARS ARE NOT ON THE HOOK.
THIS IS A SELF-CONTAINED,
SELF-SUSTAINING FINANCIAL
STRATEGY AND IF THE DEVELOPMENT
DOESN'T HAPPEN, THE BONDS
AREN'T GENERATED.
THEY DON'T GET ISSUED.
I ALSO UNDERSTAND THE CONCERN
THAT SOME HAVE RAISED ABOUT THE
CITY STEPPING INTO THE ROLE
OF INFRASTRUCTURE BUILDER FOR
PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT.
BUT THIS IS NOT UNPRECEDENTED.
EVERY PARKING STRUCTURE IN
DOWNTOWN WAS BUILT BY THE CITY
BECAUSE STRUCTURED PARKING
SIMPLY DOESN'T PENCIL OUT FOR
PRIVATE DEVELOPERS AT THIS
SCALE, ESPECIALLY WHEN THEY'RE
INCLUDING MEANINGFUL PUBLIC
BENEFITS LIKE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
CITIES ARE BETTER POSITIONED TO
TAKE THIS ON BECAUSE OF LOWER
BORROWING COSTS AND TAX
EXEMPTIONS.
THIS MAKES THE FINANCING MORE
VALUABLE AND IT UNLOCKS LONG
TERM BENEFITS THAT PRIVATE
MARKETS ALONE CAN'T DELIVER.
AND THE BENEFITS HERE ARE
SUBSTANTIAL.
MORE THAN TWO HUNDRED UNITS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING, A
THOUSAND HOUSING UNITS OVERALL
NEW RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL SPACE
,PUBLIC OPEN SPACE AND A FULL
SERVICE HOTEL THAT OUR
COMMUNITY HAS LONG NEEDED.
THIS ISN'T JUST ABOUT ONE
PROJECT.
IT'S ABOUT SETTING THE TONE FOR
THE FUTURE OF THE SOUTH STATE
CORRIDOR AND SHOWING WHAT ONE
ZONING CAN MAKE POSSIBLE WHEN
WE PLAN BOLDLY AND THINK LONG
TERM, LET'S ALSO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT STRUCTURED PARKING IS
NECESSARY FOR THE KIND
OF DENSE, WALKABLE TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT DC ONE
ENVISIONS.
WITHOUT IT WE EITHER GET
SPRAWLING SURFACE LOTS OR
PROJECTS THAT DON'T GET BUILT
AT ALL.
THE PROPOSED AMOUNT OF PARKING
HERE JUST POINT SIX VEHICLES
PER UNIT IS WELL BELOW WHAT
YOU'D SEE IN A TYPICAL
DEVELOPMENT IT REFLECTS THE
SITE'S PROXIMITY TO TRANSIT THE
CITY'S MODE SHIFT GOALS AND OUR
DESIRE TO REDUCE VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED.
BUT WE ALSO HAVE TO BE
REALISTIC MOST HOUSEHOLDS STILL
OWN CARS AND DEVELOPERS SIMPLY
CAN'T GET FINANCING FOR
MULTIPHASE PROJECTS WITHOUT
MARKET JUSTIFIED PARKING.
>> IMPORTANTLY, THIS WON'T JUST
SERVE RESIDENTS OF THE NEW
DEVELOPMENT AND IT'S NOT JUST
FOR THE DEVELOPER BARBASOL IS
DESIGNED TO BE A DESTINATION
FOR ALL AND ARBITRATES AND
BEYOND A PLACE WITH SHOPS,
RESTAURANTS, A HOTEL, A PUBLIC
GATHERING SPACE AND MORE.
THIS IS LIKE BUILDING A SECOND
DOWNTOWN ON THE CITY'S SOUTH
SIDE.
IT ONLY MAKES SENSE THAT WE
WOULD PROVIDE PUBLIC PARKING
JUST AS WE DO DOWNTOWN SO
PEOPLE FROM ALL PARTS OF THE
CITY AND BEYOND CAN ACCESS AND
ENJOY IT.
SO FOR THESE REASONS I'LL BE
VOTING YES TO AUTHORIZE THE
NEXT STEP IN THIS PROCESS AND
MY HOPE I HOPE MY COLLEAGUES
WILL DO.
>> COUNCILMAN BRACKMAN, THANK I
WON'T TELL YOU PEOPLE HAVE
ALREADY SAID WHAT THIS BRINGS
US.
IT'S A GOOD PROJECT.
I'D BE DELIGHTED TO SUPPORT IT.
IT'S A BI RIGHT PROJECT.
IT'S THE KIND OF DENSITY WE
WANT TO SEE IN OUR RTC ONE.
IT'S THRILLING TO HAVE A
PROJECT IN THIS NEWLY ZONED
DISTRICT IN WARD FOUR NO LESS.
BUT WHAT I HAVE A REALLY BIG
DIFFICULTY GETTING OVER IS
USING PUBLIC FUNDS TO FINANCE
AND OPERATE PARKING GARAGES AS
PART OF THIS DEAL, BUILD ALL
THE GARAGES YOU WANT ON YOUR
OWN.
I'M FINE WITH THAT.
YOU KNOW, UP TO A LIMIT BUT TO
ME THIS IS TAKING TAX
GENERATION THAT WE WOULD BE
HAVING, YOU KNOW, BUILT ON TOP
OF WHAT WE HAVE NOW IDEALLY TO
EXPAND THE RIDE, IMPROVE
WALKABILITY, MAKE BIKING SAFER
AND YOU INSTEAD WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT COMMITTING I THINK ONE
HUNDRED AND FORTY SIX MILLION
TO TO BUILD PARKING DECKS AND
THAT'S A HUGE INVESTMENT IN
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT I THINK
MOVES US IN THE OPPOSITE
DIRECTION OF OUR TRANSPORTATION
CLIMATE GOALS.
I KNOW PEOPLE DRIVE THEY'RE
GOING TO DRIVE HERE.
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE CARS.
NO ONE IS SAYING THAT THEY'RE
NOT GOING TO HAVE CARS BUT I
THINK WE ALSO DO RECOGNIZE THE
SETTING THAT THIS IS IN AND ASK
OURSELVES IS IT REALLY SERVING
WHAT OUR VISION AS OF TAXI ONE
IT'S I THINK FIVE LANES
OF TRAFFIC THAT YOU HAVE TO
WALK ACROSS IN BOTH DIRECTIONS
ACROSS EISENHAUER ACROSS STATE
THIS PROJECT IS SOLID IN TERMS
OF WHAT'S CONTAINED WITHIN IT.
HOW DOES IT CONNECT AROUND?
IT SEEMS THAT THE VISION IS
CARS, CARS, CARS, MORE CARS.
BEYOND THAT WE'RE LIKE IN THE
CITY TO A LONG TERM FINANCIAL
STAKE IN KEEPING THOSE GARAGES
FULL SO I HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHETHER PEOPLE ARE ACTUALLY
GOING TO PAY TO PERKINS'S.
WE
HAVE AMPLE PAVEMENT RIGHT
ACROSS THE STREET.
THEY WILL CROSS AND SAFELY BUT
THERE YOU GO.
SO I THINK LIKE I SAID THIS
LACKS THIS AREA LACKS A KIND
OF SAFE NON MOTORIZED
CONNECTIONS THAT WE ACTUALLY
WANT TO BUILD AND HELP PEOPLE
GET AROUND WITHOUT A CAR THE
DECKS WOULD SUPPOSEDLY GENERATE
REVENUE BUT I STILL DON'T THINK
IT'S THE BEST USE OF PUBLIC
MONEY AND SO THAT'S WHY I WON'T
BE SUPPORTING MOVING FORWARD
ANY FURTHER COUNCIL.
>> NO, CORNELL, I'M SORRY
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK, THANK
YOU.
I APPRECIATE EVERYTHING THAT
HAS AND SAID TONIGHT SO FAR BY
MY COLLEAGUES.
I BASE MY DECISION TONIGHT ON A
FEW FACTS AND ASSUMPTIONS BASED
ON INPUT FROM THE PUBLIC AS
WELL AS ON INFORMATION PROVIDED
TO ME FIRST NATE'S DECISION IS
ABOUT CONTINUING THE PROCESS,
NOT APPROVING THE PROJECT
OUTRIGHT OR APPROVING ANY
INDIVIDUAL BINDING DECISIONS.
NEXT, THE USE OF TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING OR TIF LARGELY MAKES
THIS PROJECT A LOT FOR THE
CITY.
>> YES, IT IS BASED ON SEVERAL
ASSUMPTIONS AND PROJECTIONS
SOME PROJECTIONS THAT BUMP OUT
TO THE YEAR TWENTY FIFTY SEVEN.
BUT BY AND LARGE THE MONEY SIDE
OF THINGS MAKES SENSE AS
DESCRIBED WITH THE ASSUMPTIONS
WE ARE ABLE TO MAKE AT THIS
TIME.
ONCE I GENERALLY FELT OK WITH
THE FUNDING MECHANISM I TURNED
MY ATTENTION TO THE RISK THE
CITY WOULD BE TAKING ON.
>> THE PARKING STRUCTURES ARE A
LARGE INVESTMENT IN FACT IF
APPROVED AS DESCRIBED IT WOULD
BE THE LARGEST BROWNFIELD
INVESTMENT IN THE CITY'S
HISTORY.
BUT THE PROJECT AS A WHOLE IS
ALSO THE LARGEST PRIVATE
INVESTMENT IN THE CITY'S
HISTORY.
>> THE POTENTIAL USE OF ONE OR
MORE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICTS IN THIS CASE TO
PROTECT THE CITY'S LIABILITY IS
IMPORTANT AND SOMETHING I WILL
BE KEEPING AN EYE ON IN THE
FINAL DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
ONCE IT COMES.
ADDITIONALLY, ANY PARKING
STRUCTURES IN PHASES BINDING
FOR THEM AT THOSE MOMENTS IN
TIME ALSO MEANS THE CITY IS NOT
TAKING ON THESE DESCRIBED COSTS
ALL AT ONCE BEFORE THE PROJECT
HAS PROVEN ITSELF EARLY ON.
>> FINALLY, AS DESCRIBED BY MY
COLLEAGUES, ARBER S COULD BRING
MANY BENEFITS TO THE CITY
INCLUDING PROVIDING MUCH NEEDED
HOUSING AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
IN A DESIRABLE LEVEL OF DENSITY
FOR A NEW RESIDENTIAL AREA.
>> BECAUSE OF THIS I WILL BE
VOTING YES ON THIS RESOLUTION
TONIGHT I LOOK FORWARD TO
OBTAINING ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION PARTICULARLY ON THE
PUBLIC INVESTMENT SIDE
OF THINGS AS THE PROCESS
UNFOLDS AND ENGAGING FULLY IN
FUTURE DECISIONS THAT COME TO
COUNCIL RELATED TO THIS PROJECT
,THINKS COUNCIL MEMBER
GRENELLE
.
IT'S A GREAT THING ABOUT HAVING
SO MANY REALLY SMART,
THOUGHTFUL COLLEAGUES AS YOU'VE
LARGELY SAID A LOT OF WHAT I
WANT TO SAY ABOUT THIS PROJECT
I THINK WHERE I'M GETTING
TRIPPED UP IS WHEN ONE WAS
PASSED IT WAS DESIGNED TO
ENCOURAGE MORE SUSTAINABLE
FORMS OF DEVELOPMENT WITH
REDUCED RESOURCES AND WITH
REDUCED RESOURCE AND ENERGY
NEEDS.
>> AND SO TO ME WHAT FEELS
GLARINGLY OBVIOUS IS AN
OMISSION IS THAT THIS
DEVELOPMENT DOESN'T SATISFY A
LOT OF WHAT WE WOULD EXPECT OR
FIND ATTRACTIVE IN OTHER
DEVELOPMENTS.
>> THERE IS A POTENTIAL FOR
GEOTHERMAL IS NOT A COMMITMENT
TO GRANTING OUR ZERO GOALS.
>> AND WHEN I RAN FOR OFFICE I
TOLD PEOPLE WE NEED MORE
HOUSING SO PEOPLE DON'T DRIVE
IN TO ANN ARBOR AND I FIRMLY
BELIEVE THAT THAT'S TRUE.
>> I DO WE ARE IN A HOUSING
CRISIS.
THIS IS A GREAT PROJECT BUT I'M
REALLY CONCERNED ABOUT THE
COMMITMENTS THAT IT MAKES TO
SUSTAINABILITY IN ANN ARBOR.
I THINK COUNCIL MEMBER ATMAN
DID A REALLY GOOD JOB
OF DESCRIBING ITS THAT IS NOT A
GREAT PLACE TO GET AROUND AS A
PEDESTRIAN OR BICYCLIST AND THE
MONEY THAT WE'RE USING DOES NOT
IMPROVE WALKABILITY LIKABILITY.
IT DOES NOTHING EXCEPT IMPROVE
SEWER LINE WHICH IS OBVIOUSLY
VALUABLE.
>> THAT'S VALUABLE
INFRASTRUCTURE BUT IT IS A TINY
AMOUNT OF THE OVERALL
BROWNFIELD REQUEST AND I THINK
IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO KNOW I
KNOW THAT THIS WILL COME BACK
AND WILL CONTINUE TO HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS BUT THE
BROWNFIELD APPLICATION ISN'T
EVEN FINALIZED.
IT'S GOING BACK FOR ADDITIONAL
ADDITIONAL REVISIONS BECAUSE
IT'S NOT FINALIZED.
>> SO THAT TO ME FROM A FINANCE
PERSPECTIVE GIVES ME PAUSE.
>> I DON'T I WOULD FEEL BETTER
ABOUT SAYING YES IF WE WERE
GOING TO DO THIS AFTER THE WORK
SESSION WHEN WE'VE HAD A TIME
TO GO THROUGH AND HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS IN MORE DETAIL
AND CERTAINLY BE ABLE TO SEE A
FINAL BROWNFIELD PLAN.
>> SO ALL OF THAT SAID, I THINK
WE DO NEED TO TAKE A HARD LOOK
AT THE RECURRING EXPENSE WHEN
I'VE ASKED FOR BUDGET ITEMS TO
BE CONSIDERED, I'VE BEEN TOLD
REPEATEDLY THAT RECURRING
EXPENSES ARE REALLY BAD BUT NOW
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A RECURRING
EXPENSE AND WE'RE OWNING
PROPERTY OUTSIDE OF DOWNTOWN.
SO THAT FEELS ALSO VERY NERVOUS
TO ME.
MAKES ME VERY NERVOUS WHEN I
DON'T UNDERSTAND THE REST
OF THE FINANCING PIECE OF IT.
>> SO ALL OF THOSE THINGS THAT
I DO THINK THIS IS A GOOD
PROJECT BUT I WOULD LIKE TO
AMEND THIS RESOLUTION AND ADD A
RESOLVED CLAUSE THAT WE SENT TO
THE CITY CLERK ON MARCH 17TH
WHEN I THOUGHT THAT THIS WOULD
BE DISCUSSED AT THAT MEETING
AND I'LL READ IT ALOUD THE
ADDITIONAL RESOLVED CLAUSE
READS RESOLVED THE CITY COUNCIL
DIRECTS THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TO NEGOTIATE COMMITMENTS FROM
THE DEVELOPER FOR FEATURES IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE CITY'S
EIGHT ZERO INVISION ZERO PLANS
THAT INCLUDE, FOR EXAMPLE,
SOLAR OR GEOTHERMAL ENERGY,
INCREASED ACCESS TO BUSSING AND
SAFE MULTIMODAL TRANSPORTATION
,ET CETERA
.
>> IS THERE A SECOND SUCCUBI
COUNCILOR RIC'S
CATHERINE
CORNELIO STOLE THE FLOOR ON ON
THE ON THE AMENDMENT AND THE
AMENDMENT.
>> OK, THANK YOU THIS I KNOW
THAT WE DO NOT REQUIRE THESE
OF PROJECTS AND I KNOW THAT
WE'RE GETTING OBVIOUSLY HOUSING
AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS I'VE
ALREADY I'VE ALREADY
ACKNOWLEDGED THIS FEELS LIKE IF
IF THE CITY WANTS TO GO INTO
PARTNERSHIP WITH A DEVELOPER ON
A DEVELOPMENT OF THIS SIZE,
THEN I WOULD LIKE TO SEE MORE
OF OUR GOALS AND OUR VALUES AS
A COMMUNITY ADVANCED AND I FEEL
LIKE ASKING FOR A LITTLE MORE
THOUGHT AROUND H0 VISION ZERO
PLANS AND HOW THIS PROJECT
SPECIFICALLY WOULD ADVANCE
THOSE HELPS ALSO SHOW TO THE
COMMUNITY THAT WHEN WE SAY THAT
WE ARE GOING TO INCREASE
HOUSING FOR X, Y, Z REASONS AND
STILL REMAIN COMMITTED TO THE
THINGS WE SAID MATTERED TO US
WHEN WE RAN FOR OFFICE LIKE
EIGHT TO ZERO LIKE VISION ZERO
THAT WE ARE MAKING THAT
EXPECTATIONS OF DEVELOPERS
ESPECIALLY WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS IN INVESTMENT.
THIS FEELS LIKE ENTERING INTO A
PARTNERSHIP THAT IS FAR MORE
EQUITABLE THAN WHAT WE'RE
CURRENTLY CONSIDERING
.
COUNCILOR AGISTING DENHA
DENHA
I JUST HAVE A QUESTION AS IT
RELATES TO THE LANGUAGE THAT
OBVIOUSLY THIS DIRECTS THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO NEGOTIATE
COMMITMENTS.
IS THERE AN EXPECTATION THAT IT
OBLIGATES THAT ONE OF THESE
THINGS NEEDS TO BE ACHIEVED IN
ORDER TO MOVE FORWARD?
I GUESS MY I GUESS MY MY
QUESTION IS ABOUT WHETHER OR
NOT THERE IS AN EXPECTATION
THAT THAT ONE OF THESE THINGS
HAS TO BE ACCOMPLISHED OR IF
THE NEGOTIATIONS MOVE FORWARD
AND THEY COME BACK TO US AND
ARE UNSUCCESSFUL.
>> WHAT IMPACT DO YOU BELIEVE
THAT THAT HAS ON THE PLAN OR IS
THIS JUST A DIRECTION DIRECTIVE
FOR THE ADMINISTRATORS TO
NEGOTIATE TO THE BEST OF HIS
ABILITY
?
I'M NOT A LAWYER COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA I WILL TELL YOU THAT IF
THE IF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
WHO I KNOW ALWAYS DOES HIS BEST
FOR US IF THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR DOES NOT COME
BACK WITH THESE COMMITMENTS, AT
LEAST SOME OF THEM AND SHOW
PROGRESS ON THEM, THEN THIS
PROJECT WILL NOT HAVE MY
SUPPORT AT THE END.
WOULD YOU LIKE ME TO ADDRESS A
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA YEAH.
>> I MEAN IF IF YOU IF YOU FEEL
THAT THERE'S YES PLEASE I DO
NOT THINK THE CURRENT LANGUAGE
HAS A REQUIREMENT THAT A
COMMITMENT BE IN THE CONTRACT
IT IS A DIRECTION TO NEGOTIATE
AND NEGOTIATE IMPLIES THAT ANY
NUMBER OF RESULTS ARE POSSIBLE
.
>> HOWEVER IF IT WOULD GIVE
COUNCIL MORE PEACE OF MIND WE
COULD ADD A CLARIFYING WORD OR
TWO BUT I DON'T MOVE FOR AN
AMENDMENT TO AN AMENDMENT SO I
DEFER TO YOU.
>> NO, NO THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE THAT AND I ASK
THAT QUESTION BECAUSE I THINK
THESE ARE ALL YOU KNOW,
INCREDIBLY LAUDABLE GOALS.
THERE ARE THINGS THAT I
CERTAINLY WOULD LOVE TO SEE
IMPLEMENTED INTO THIS INTO THIS
PROJECT.
BUT I ALSO FELT RELATIVELY
COMFORTABLE WITH THE EXISTING
PROJECT BECAUSE OF THE NUMBER
OF THINGS THAT WE ARE ACHIEVING
THROUGH THIS THROUGH THE CITY
ALREADY.
>> AND SO I
THAT THAT WAS MY
QUESTION FOR THIS.
YOU KNOW, I WOULD LOVE FOR ALL
OF THESE THINGS TO BE INCLUDED
KNOW THERE ARE A NUMBER
OF THINGS THAT I WOULD LIKE TO
BE INCLUDED IN EVERY PROJECT
THAT WE DO.
BUT I ALSO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE
IMPACT ON HOUSING AND
PARTICULARLY AFFORDABLE HOUSING
AND OTHER THINGS THAT OTHERS
HAVE MENTIONED THROUGHOUT THIS
DISCUSSION THAT ARE ALSO
INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT TO ME.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> I APPRECIATE OF COUNCIL
MEMBER DENHA POSING THE
QUESTION AND SHARING HIS
THOUGHTS BECAUSE WE THOUGHT A
LOT AND DEBATED A LOT ON
PLANNING COMMISSION WHEN THE
TWO ZONES WERE BEING
CREATED ABOUT WHAT SHOULD GO
INTO THEM AND WE TALKED ABOUT
INCLUDING EXPLICIT REQUIREMENTS
FOR SUSTAINABILITY AND OUR
DECISION WAS THAT WHAT WE ARE
TRYING TO DO WITH TSWANA ZONING
IS TO GET HOUSING IN PARTS
OF THE CITY WHERE THERE WHERE
IT DOESN'T EXIST TO EXTEND THE
AS COUNCIL MEMBER IHR SPOKE SO
ELOQUENTLY TO CREATE A SECOND
DOWNTOWN TO EXTEND THE HEART
OF THE CITY TO ANOTHER PLACE.
I MEAN THE CITY THAT I GREW UP
IN HAD FOUR DOWNTOWNS AND IT
WASN'T A BIG CITY SO WE
CONCLUDED ON PLANNING
COMMISSION THAT PACKING MORE
INTO TAXI ONE WOULD PROBABLY
MAKE IT UNREALIZABLE AND IT
WOULD BE DIFFERENT IF WE ARE
FIVE YEARS OUT AND WE HAVE
GEOTHERMAL AND THAT'S AN
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WE'RE
SUPPORTING BUT WE DON'T HAVE IT
YET.
>> SO WE HAVE A PROJECT THAT IS
RESPONDING TO THE THINGS THAT
WE ASKED FOR.
I I THINK THERE'S A REASON WHY
WE DON'T REQUIRE THE LOVELY
THINGS THAT ARE IN THIS
AMENDMENT AND BECAUSE I WOULD
LIKE TO SEE THIS PROJECT
REALIZED I THINK I WILL NOT
SUPPORT THE AMENDMENT.
>> I THINK I FOR MY PART I'M
KNOW I THINK FOR MY PART I'M
SUPPORTING THE AMENDMENT AS I
HEAR IT FROM COUNCIL AND
COUNCIL FROM FROM FROM COUNCIL
COUNCIL MEMBERS AND COUNCIL AT
LARGE.
THESE ARE THESE ARE GOALS THAT
WE HAVE SOME OF THESE GOALS ARE
REFLECTED IN COMPONENTS OF THE
EXISTING PROJECT.
OTHERS ARE NOT IN ADDITIONAL
CONVERSATION WITH BETWEEN THE
ADMINISTRATOR AND THE PROJECT
TEAM MAY BEAR FRUIT, MAY NOT.
BUT IT IT'S WHAT I INTERPRET
THE AMENDMENT TO BE A REQUEST
FOR FOR SPECIFICITY WITH
RESPECT TO THOSE CONVERSATIONS
AND IN THAT LIGHT I'M PERFECTLY
FINE MOVING FORWARD ON THAT
BASIS.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S
THANKS.
>> YEAH, I'LL BE SUPPORTING
THIS AS WELL.
I THINK AS WE KNOW DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENTS HOLD A LOT WEIGHT
RIGHT.
AND THEY HOLD OUR EXPECTATIONS
.
SO I THINK GOING INTO THIS IT'S
IT'S NICE TO HAVE SOME
DIRECTION IN TERMS OF THIS NEW
NEGOTIATIONS ABOUT WHAT WE'D
LIKE TO SEE OUT OF IT.
I SEE THIS AS SIGNIFICANTLY
DIFFERENT THAN RTC ONE
DISCUSSIONS THAT WAS
DEVELOPMENT.
>> IT WAS SUPPOSED TO HOLD
ITSELF UP BY ITS YOU KNOW, GET
ITSELF UP BY WITHOUT PUBLIC
SUPPORT.
>> THIS IS THREE HUNDRED
MILLION DOLLARS OF PUBLIC
SUPPORT THAT'S GOING INTO THIS
THAT'S ABOUT 240000 DOLLARS PER
IT OF HOUSING AND YOU KNOW,
IT'S BEEN ANTICIPATED I THINK
ONE PERCENT OF THE CITY'S
POPULATION THAT COULD
POTENTIALLY LIVE HERE IN THE
FUTURE RIGHT.
SO I THINK OUR EXPECTATION IS
GOING INTO THIS AND WHAT THIS
DEVELOPMENT LOOKS LIKE AND WHAT
THE GOALS ARE IMPORTANT I THIS
WE'VE HAD I'VE HAD SOME LOVELY
CONVERSATIONS AROUND THIS
AROUND THIS PROJECT AND SOME
OF THEM HAVE LEFT ME WITH A FEW
CONCERNS AND QUESTIONS.
THERE'S SOME EXCITING THINGS.
THERE'S ALSO SOME QUESTIONS.
THIS IS A SECOND DOWNTOWN IS
THIS A SECOND DOWNTOWN THAT IS
GUARDED BY PRIVATE SECURITY
GUARDS?
THAT'S MY UNDERSTANDING.
IS THIS AT SOME POINTS IN THE
CONVERSATIONS THIS HAS BEEN
SOMETHING THAT IS DISCUSSED
THAT THERE WOULD BE SHUTTLES
THAT WOULD TAKE PEOPLE TO AND
FROM DOWNTOWN.
SO I'D LIKE TO SEE TO MAKE SURE
THAT THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
ACTUALLY IS A PROJECT THAT
ALIGNS WITH OUR VALUES IF WE'RE
GOING TO BE INVESTING AT THIS
LEVEL OF SUPPORT IN IT.
>> BUT HIGHER THAN GARCIA
ANYONE THEN PERHAPS CALL IT A
DAILY LIMIT?
YEAH, I I JUST I WANTED TO
RESPOND TO THE TO THE POINT I
APPRECIATE THE ARGUMENTS ON ALL
SIDES.
>> I REALLY DO AND I MOST
OF ALL APPRECIATE THAT WE'RE
HAVING THIS THOUGHTFUL
DISCUSSION.
>> I DO THINK THAT TO COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGGS'S CONCERN OR OR
POINT THAT RTC ONE DISCUSSIONS
WERE DIFFERENT.
>> IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT
THOSE DISCUSSIONS WERE
THEORETICAL AND THIS IS THE
FIRST PROJECT THAT IS ACTUALLY
GOING TO THE ONE TO THE TEST.
AND WHAT WE'RE LEARNING IS THAT
IF WE WANT TO REALIZE DENSITY,
WHAT I'M LEARNING IS THAT IF WE
WANT TO REALIZE DENSITY IN T
ONE, WE'RE GOING TO NEED TO
PROVIDE A FORM OF PARKING
UNLESS WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO
HAVE MASSIVE PARKING LOTS.
>> PEOPLE AGAIN DEVELOPERS
CANNOT GET FINANCING WITHOUT
ADEQUATE PARKING AND WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT JUST POINT SIX
PER UNIT WHICH IN AND OF ITSELF
IS THAT IS WHAT WE ENVISIONED
FOR ONE.
SO I WILL SUPPORT THE AMENDMENT
BECAUSE I SEE NO HARM IN HAVING
ANOTHER DISCUSSION ABOUT IT.
BUT I ALSO CONTINUE TO SUPPORT
THIS BECAUSE AS WE'VE SAID, THE
FACT OF KONGREGATE BRING PEOPLE
TOGETHER AND AND AND HAVING
HOUSING AT THIS SCALE ON A
TRANSIT LINE WHERE PEOPLE DON'T
HAVE TO USE THAT CAR THAT THEY
HAVE IN AND OF ITSELF HELPS US
REALIZE OUR CLIMATE GOALS AND
WITHOUT HAVING TO NECESSARILY
LAY AROUND ALL THESE EXTRA
THINGS WHICH COULD MAKE THE
PROJECT UNFEASIBLE.
>> SO COUNCILOR GARCIA, THANK
YOU FOR ME.
>> I THINK THAT'S I APPRECIATE
THAT SOME OF THESE
CONVERSATIONS HAVE HAPPENED IN
REGARDS TO ESPECIALLY
ACCESSIBILITY AND JUST
EVALUATING WHAT OUR NEAREST
ACCESS TO BUS STOPS TO UNITS
FOR EXAMPLE.
AND I NOTE THAT THESE IT'S IN
CLOSE PROXIMITY TO THREE FULL
SERVICE BUS STOPS CURRENTLY AS
ACCESSIBILITY AND INCLUSIVE
DESIGN FOR CITIES REALLY
EMPHASIZES IS THAT IT'S ABOUT
MAKING INFRASTRUCTURE THAT SAFE
FOR ALWAYS PEOPLE MOVE AROUND
INCLUDING CARS.
THAT BEING SAID, I WILL BE
SUPPORTING THIS AMENDMENT
BECAUSE I THINK HAVING THAT
FURTHER CONVERSATION ABOUT HOW
DOES THIS OR CAN THIS ALIGN
WITH SOME OF OUR VALUES AND
GOALS AROUND CLIMATE
ACCESSIBILITY?
IT'S IT'S A WORTHY CONVERSATION
TO HAVE DISCUSSION ON THE
AMENDMENT.
COUNCILOR WATSON, SO YEAH, I
SUPPORT A PLAN ON SUPPORTING
THE AMENDMENT BUT I MEAN I DO
HOPE THAT THE ADMINISTRATOR CAN
CAN KIND OF GIVE THE OUTCOMES
OF THESE DISCUSSIONS AND
PERHAPS MAYBE IF IT ENDS UP
BEING A SET OF OPTIONS BECAUSE
I KNOW WITH VISION ZERO I MEAN
YOU KNOW, WHATEVER BUT WHEN
IT'S 20, 30 DIZZIER OR 20 30
PLAN IT CAN MEAN MANY THINGS
FROM YOU KNOW, LEED GOLD
CERTIFICATION IS IT LEAD ZERO
CERTIFICATION?
>> I MEAN THESE STANDARDS HAVE
HAVE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
DIFFERENT MEANINGS AND THERE
ARE A LOT OF DIFFERENT LEVELS
THAT WE CAN GET TO.
>> I LIKE THIS IDEA
OF GEOTHERMAL.
WE'LL SEE IF IT'S POSSIBLE I
THINK BECAUSE IT'S SO HARD TO
GET AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE
CITY.
TWO HUNDRED UNITS IS MORE THAN
WE'VE BUILT IN THE VILLAGE TO
DATE WITH WITH VILLAGE HOMES TO
DATE IT'S 20 PERCENT MORE THAN
THIS TYPE OF BROWNFIELD PROJECT
WOULD USUALLY NEED.
USUALLY THIS WOULD NEED ONE
HUNDRED FIFTY UNITS.
THIS IS A TWO HUNDRED UNIT SO I
GUESS 50 MORE THE EFFECT THE
FACT IS IS THAT IT'S HARD TO
GET FINANCING FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
IT'S HARD TO GET LAND FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OUTSIDE
OF CITY OWN LOTS DOWNTOWN AND
THIS PROJECT WOULD ALSO BENEFIT
FROM THE PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
ASSUMING COST OF PLANNING THAT
WOULD NORMALLY BE BORNE BY
MILLAGE FUNDED ACTIVITY.
SO I'LL SUPPORT THE AMENDMENT
BUT I'D LIKE TO HAVE AN
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THE COSTS
AND BENEFITS ARE FOR THE
DISCUSSION THE MINUTE ARE ON
FAVOR AND THIS IS ON THE
AMENDMENT EXCLUSIVELY.
>> LET'S HEAR ROBERT ROCKALL
THAT STORY THE KAZMIR COST
MAGAZINE ONE YES.
MAYOR TAYLOR YES.
CUSTOMER ER YES.
YES THAT'S OUR BREAK.
YES COUNCILOR CORNWALL.
YES.
>> CUSTOMER DISH NO CUSTOMER
HARRISON YES.
COUNCILOR WATSON.
>> YES AMALA YES.
>> POTTSBORO DENHA YES.
MOTION CARRIES FURTHER
DISCUSSION THE MAIN MOTION AS
AMENDED I GOT COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON THERE ARE MANY QUESTIONS
YET TO BE ANSWERED ON THIS
PROJECT ESPECIALLY AS PART
OF THE COUNCIL PLAN THAT THIS
WAS DISCUSSED AT A FUTURE WORK
SESSION.
THIS PROJECT AND EVERY PUBLIC
PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP IS SUCCESS
SUSCEPTIBLE TO RISK.
EVEN SO AT THIS TIME I FEEL IT
IS APPROPRIATE TO AUTHORIZE THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO CONTINUE
NEGOTIATIONS.
I FEEL THAT WHEN FACED WITH THE
OPPORTUNITY TO CREATE 200
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS AND A
THOUSAND TOTAL UNITS OF HOUSING
AND A HIGH PRIORITY TO ONE AREA
IN A PROJECT THAT HAS BEEN
ANALYZED BY EXTERNAL
CONSULTANTS, THE CITY SHOULD
CONTINUE TO PURSUE IT UNTIL WE
HAVE ALL THE DETAILS NECESSARY
FOR A FINAL DECISION IN ANN
HARBOR AND AT THIS COUNCIL
TABLE WE HAVE BEEN CLEAR THAT
HOUSING IS A CORE VALUE.
OTHER CITIES HAVE USED TAXPAYER
BACKED MUNICIPAL BONDS TO
PURSUE
DIFFERENT GOALS EVEN IN
THIS UNCERTAIN TIME.
JUST LAST MONTH GRAND RAPIDS
ISSUED ONE HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHT
DOLLARS MILLION IN CITY BACK
BONDS FOR A COMBINED STATEMENT
CONCERT VENUE.
SOME OF THAT FINANCING IS FOR
PARKING DECKS.
IT WAS A DIFFERENT PAYBACK PLAN
RELYING ON REVENUE FROM KENT
COUNTY'S HOTEL TAX.
BUT THE TAXPAYERS ARE STILL
ASSUMING SOME OF THE RISK
OF THE PROJECT FOR THE 30 YEARS
IT TAKES TO REPAY THE BOND.
>> GIVE US THAT CITY CAN USE
THESE TOOLS TO INCREASE SPORTS
AND ENTERTAINMENT.
I THINK THERE'S ALL THE MORE
REASON TO INVESTIGATE BONDS TO
SUPPORT A PROJECT TO DELIVER ON
HOUSING PREFERABLY AS A PROVEN
PARTNER.
BUT DON'T TAKE MY WORD FOR IT.
THE WEBSITE SEARCH REVEALS THAT
THE BRIDGE PARK DEVELOPMENT IN
DUBLIN, OHIO HAS DELIVERED ON
THE PROMISE OF BUILDING A
THOUSAND UNITS USING TWO
HUNDRED EIGHTY SIX MILLION IN
PUBLIC FINANCING THROUGH THE
COLUMBUS FRANKLIN COUNTY
FINANCIAL AUTHORITY.
AND I ALSO LOOKED AT SOME
RESEARCH ON DUBLIN THE
MUNICIPAL PARTNER AND I FOUND
THAT IT'S THE FIRST AND ONLY
CITY IN THE U.S. TO ACHIEVE
TRIPLE-A CREDIT RATINGS FROM
FOUR AGENCIES I DON'T BELIEVE
THEY GOT THERE BY CHOOSING BAD
PARTNERS AND PUBLIC PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIPS.
THE USUAL DISCLAIMERS ABOUT
PAST PERFORMANCE NOT
GUARANTEEING FOR FUTURE RESULTS
STILL APPLY.
IN MY OPINION IT'S GOOD TO
CONTINUE NEGOTIATIONS WITH THIS
POTENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PARTNER.
THERE ARE STILL MORE DETAILS TO
COME AND I'VE ALWAYS TAKEN THE
POSITION THAT I'LL TRY TO GET
AS MUCH INFORMATION AS POSSIBLE
BEFORE MAKING A DECISION.
>> BUT AT THIS POINT I'M
SUPPORTING CONTINUED
NEGOTIATIONS FURTHER DISCUSSION
COUNCIL MEMBER THANK YOU.
SHE'S PULLING UP SOME OF THE
ORIGINAL VISION ARTICULATED AND
SOME STAFF MEMOS REGARDING THE
TRANSIT CORRIDORS AND ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT IT SAYS IS
IT'S TO SUPPORT REDEVELOPMENT
AND INFILL DEVELOPMENT TO
REALIZE MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS
AND ACHIEVE MIXED USE CORRIDORS
THAT SUPPORT AND SUSTAIN
TRANSIT SERVICE.
IT ALSO TALKS ABOUT CREATING A
PEDESTRIAN FRIENDLY DESIGN FOR
ALL TRANSIT USERS OF ANY MODE.
AND I GUESS MY QUESTION IS AT
WHAT POINT DOES THE TRANSIT
SYSTEM SUSTAINED BY DEVELOPMENT
ONE AT WHAT POINT DO WE START
TO REALIZE THE TAX BENEFIT TO
SUSTAIN THE SERVICE FROM THESE
KINDS OF DEVELOPMENTS IF WE'RE
LOCKED IN FOR THE NEXT 30 YEARS
OF PUTTING THE MONEY ELSEWHERE?
SO AGAIN, THAT'S MY BIGGEST
STICKING POINT AT THIS POINT.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION I'LL BE
VOTING I'LL BE VOTING YES ON
THIS.
>> I AM EXCITED ABOUT THE
PROSPECT OF A THOUSAND NEW
UNITS YOU KNOW, 1500 PERHAPS
NEW NEW AND ARBORISTS.
I'M EXCITED ABOUT THE PROSPECT
OF OVER 200 AFFORDABLE UNITS A
MONUMENTAL CHANGE AND
IMPROVEMENT TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IN THE COMMUNITY.
I'M EXCITED ABOUT THE PROSPECTS
OF HUNDREDS OF JOBS, NEW JOBS
AT THE SITE AND EXCITED AT THE
PROSPECT OF INITIATING A A NEW
RESIDENTIAL CENTER IN OUR
COMMUNITY.
THESE ARE OUR INCREDIBLY
ATTRACTIVE BENEFITS FROM THE
PROPOSAL IT'S BEEN IT IS
OF COURSE NOT COMING WITHOUT
ANY CITY PARTICIPATION OR CITY
SUPPORT.
BUT I FOR MY PART I WOULD URGE
CAUTION WHEN IT COMES TO
TALKING ABOUT THIS AS YOU KNOW
IN THE CONTEXT OF PUBLIC
INVESTMENT USING PUBLIC FUNDS
AND SO FORTH, THE PROJECT WILL
OF COURSE BE FINANCED BY TIF
FUNDS.
THESE TIF FUNDS ARE TAX AND
FINANCING TAXES THAT COME FROM
THE DEVELOPER TO PAY FOR THE
LOT INCOME FROM THE PARKING
STRUCTURES TO PAY FOR THE BONDS
USED TO PURCHASE THE PARKING
STRUCTURE.
THE NRA IS EXISTING TAXPAYERS.
YOU ME OUR MONEY IS NOT GOING
IN TO PAY FOR THESE BONDS NOW
THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY IS
OF COURSE ULTIMATELY BACKING UP
THESE INSTRUMENTS AND SO IT IS
INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT THAT WE
HAVE DONE TO DATE AND THAT WE
CONTINUE TO DO A GREAT DEAL
OF DILIGENCE, A GREAT DEAL
OF STRESS TESTING ON THESE
PROJECTS.
BUT WE ARE NOT USING EXISTING
TAX DOLLARS FOR THIS PURPOSE.
THESE TAX DOLLARS ARE GOING TO
BE THE TAX DOLLARS PAID INTO
THE KITTY BY THE DEVELOPER FOR
THE BONDS ASSOCIATED WITH THEIR
PROJECT.
>> THAT'S A CRUCIAL WAY.
THAT'S THAT IS A CRUCIAL
UNDERSTANDING THAT MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC NEED TO HAVE.
IT IS I THINK FAIR TO SAY THAT
THIS IS PUBLIC PARTICIPATION.
>> I CAUTION THE CONCEPT OF IT
BEING I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
THAT WE MAKE IT VERY CLEAR WHEN
WE TALK ABOUT WHETHER THESE ARE
PUBLIC FUNDS OR PUBLIC
INVESTMENT THAT THIS IS NOT
EXISTING TAX DOLLARS BEING USED
FOR THE PURPOSE THAT THESE ARE
NEW TAX DOLLARS THAT NEVER
WOULD EXIST BUT FOR THE
DEVELOPMENT AND THAT THEY ARE
COMING ENTIRELY FROM THE
DEVELOPER FOR A DISCUSSION
COUNCIL MEMBER THE ARE THIRD
PARTY CONSULTANTS REPORT WAS
BROUGHT UP AND I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THE
CONSULTANT THAT WE HIRED TO
CONDUCT A FINANCIAL REVIEW
OF THE PROPOSED PROJECT ALSO
NOTED SOME THINGS OF IMPORTANCE
AND ASKED US SOME QUESTIONS.
IT FUNDAMENTALLY ASKED, YOU
KNOW, IS IT A CITY PRIORITY TO
SPUR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT VIA
THE PROVISION FINANCING TO
ENCOURAGE THE SOUTH SIDE
DEVELOP REDEVELOPMENT WITHIN C
ONE?
>> YOU KNOW, IS PUBLIC
FINANCING NEEDED TO HAVE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT NTC WON?
ARE WE SAYING THAT FOR ALL
FUTURE PROJECTS AND ALL
OF THESE T7 CORRIDORS THAT WE
HAVE JUST APPROVED AND SAID
THAT WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO
SUPPORT THAT WE NEED THIS
PUBLIC FINANCING?
I DON'T THINK WE'VE HAD THEM IN
PLACE LONG ENOUGH.
I DON'T THINK THAT THAT'S BEEN
A TEST TO MODEL MY ANSWER WOULD
BE NO, AT LEAST NOT TO THIS
LEVEL.
IT'S ONLY NEEDED TO TO REALIZE
THIS PROJECT.
>> SO AND THEN FINALLY IT ALSO
IT ALSO SHOWS THAT THESE
STRUCTURES PRESENT A FINANCIAL
RISK TO THE CITY.
WE'RE HAVING A WORK SESSION
NEXT WEEK TO LEARN MORE ABOUT
THE BONDS TO LEARN ARTHUS, THE
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
AGAIN, I BELIEVE THAT IT'S IT'S
IMPORTANT THAT WE WE ASK THESE
QUESTIONS, HAVE MORE TIME TO
ASK, YOU KNOW, GET SOME
ANSWERS.
>> I I SEE THE DIRECTION THIS
IS GOING BUT I'M GOING TO ASK
FOR TO HAVE FOR AN AMENDMENT TO
STRIKE TWO TWO ITEMS FROM THE
THE RESOLUTION IN FRONT OF US
TONIGHT ANTICIPATING THAT THEY
THEY COULD BE BROUGHT BACK
WHICH IS THE SECOND AND THIRD
RESOLVE CLAUSES IN THE CURRENT
RESOLUTION IN FRONT OF US THE
ONE TO BRING BACK THE THE
MULTIPHASE BOND ISSUANCES AND
THE SPECIAL THE DIRECTION
OF MOVING FORWARD A SPECIAL
ASSESSMENT DISTRICT MY SENSES
SO I WILL WE CAN DISCUSS IS
THERE A SECOND TALK ABOUT
COUNCILOR COL COUNCILOR BRIGGS,
YOU TOLD THE FLOOR YES.
>> SO MY MY TAKE IS THAT
THERE'S CLEARLY SUPPORT AROUND
THIS TABLE TO CONTINUE WITH
NEGOTIATIONS AROUND THIS THIS
PROJECT.
I WOULD SUGGEST THAT WE THAT WE
WAIT UNTIL AFTER HAVING A
HAVING A WORK SESSION WHERE
FOLKS CAN ACTUALLY ASK MORE
QUESTIONS AND UNDERSTAND, YOU
KNOW, WHAT IT IS WHAT IS IN
THIS BROWNFIELD PLAN.
I THINK THERE'S A NUMBER
OF QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN RAISED
ON THE BROWNFIELD COMMITTEE
ITSELF AND EXACTLY HOW MUCH
WILL THE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICT ACTUALLY PROTECT US?
I THINK THERE ARE SOME
QUESTIONS THAT WE HAVE OUTLINED
SO I WOULD JUST ASK THAT WE WE
STRIKE THOSE BEFORE MOVING
FORWARD WITH ASKING THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO BRING
EVERYTHING BACK TO US FROM MY
PART.
I'M GOING TO VOTE AGAINST THESE
THESE CHANGES THESE PROPOSED
AMENDMENTS.
I APPRECIATE THAT AND SHARE THE
VIEW THAT WE WILL NEED TO
REVIEW THESE QUESTIONS WHEN IN
THE EVENT THAT THEY DO COME
BACK TO US WITH A GREAT DEAL
OF SCRUTINY.
>> HOWEVER, YOU KNOW, WE CAN WE
WILL I BELIEVE AS A GROUP
ENGAGE IN THAT, ENGAGE THAT
DILLONS ENGAGE IN THAT SCRUTINY
AT THE TIME WHEN THE QUESTIONS
COME BACK TO US TO ASK THE
ADMINISTRATOR FOR ANOTHER VOTE
TO BRING BACK TO US TO TO THIS
IS ALREADY I THINK A MULTI VOTE
PROCESS FOR SOMETHING WHICH IS
TYPICALLY NOT A MULTI VOTE
PROCESS.
WE ARE ALREADY ASKING THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO TO MOVE
FORWARD, TO NEGOTIATE, TO BRING
SOMETHING BACK TO US WHICH
OFTEN COMES BACK TO WHICH OFTEN
COMES BACK TO US IN THE
ORDINARY COURSE THROUGH THE
BROWNFIELD COMMITTEE WITHOUT
THESE PRIOR VOTES WE HAVE A
VOTE HERE.
WE'RE ASKING FOR NEGOTIATION,
THE ORDINARY, THE ORDINARY
PROCESSES WILL CONTINUE THE
QUESTIONS EITHER THE BROWNFIELD
AND THEN THE SPECIALIST
ASSESSMENT THIS IS WILL COME
BACK TO US IN DUE COURSE.
>> WE'LL VOTE THEM UP OR DOWN
AT THAT TIME.
THAT SEEMS TO ME TO BE
EFFICIENT ADDING WHAT IS
IMPLIED SECOND VOTE IN BETWEEN
TO MY EYE DOESN'T VALUE ADD
FURTHER DISCUSSION COUNCILOR
QUENELLE I AM A QUESTION BUT I
DON'T KNOW WHO TO ASK.
THROW IT OUT THERE, THROW IT
OUT THERE AND SEE WHAT HAPPENS
AND WHAT I GUESS JUST FOR
SETTING EXPECTATIONS CAN MAYBE
MR HONY IT'S YOU BUT CAN YOU
GIVE US LIKE THIS IS WHAT YOU
CAN EXPECT THIS IS THE ORDER.
WILL THE BOND ISSUANCE COME TO
US BEFORE A DEVELOPMENT PLAN,
AN AGREEMENT LIKE CAN YOU HELP
US UNDERSTAND WHAT OUR NEXT
STEPS WILL BE BECAUSE THESE ARE
REALLY BIG BUCKETS THAT I DON'T
I DON'T UNDERSTAND SO IN FAIRLY
SHORT ORDER YOU HAVE THE
BROWNFIELD PLATE
.
THERE IS NO SCENARIO NO
SCENARIO FOR A BOND ISSUANCE
WOULD COME TO YOU BEFORE
DEVELOPMENT AGREE WITH IN
PRACTICAL TERMS YOU'RE PROBABLY
YEAR OR TWO OUT FROM AN ACTUAL
BOND ISSUANCE.
SO THE DEVELOPMENT PLAN HAS TO
GO THROUGH COUNTY HAS TO GO
THROUGH HERE PLANNING
COMMISSIONS WEIGHING IN AT SOME
POINT COUNCIL WILL HAVE TO SAY
YES OR NO TO INDIVIDUAL BOND
ISSUANCES AT THE TIME THAT
THEY'RE NEEDED.
>> THE REAL PURPOSE OF THE
COMMUNICATION THAT WE'VE BEEN
DOING AND WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO
DO WITH THIS PARTICULAR
RESOLUTION IS BE COMPLETELY
TRANSPARENT.
THIS IS A HUGE DEAL.
THERE'S GOING TO BE MULTIPLE
POINTS ALONG THE WAY AND WE'RE
TRYING TO TELEGRAPH THAT THE
THE OTHER THING IS A BOND ISSUE
WITH ITSELF IS AN AWFUL LOT
OF WORK INTERNALLY AND
EXTERNALLY WHICH WE'RE EXCITED
TO DO AT THE TIME THAT IS
NECESSARY.
>> BUT ONE OF THE UNDERLYING
PURPOSES FOR THE RESOLUTION IS
IF COUNCIL'S ALREADY DECIDED
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO WANT TO DO
IT.
>> WE WERE SIMPLY ASKING THEM
TO TELL US THAT NOW THEN WE
WOULDN'T DO ALL THAT WORK.
>> BUT IF WE'RE OPEN TO
CONTINUING ON AND WE'RE
PREPARED AND HAPPY TO DO THAT
BUT THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
AND THE BROWNFIELD PLAN WOULD
BE TO DOCUMENT THAT YOU WOULD
BE GETTING CERTAINLY BEFORE
THERE WOULD EVER BE A BOND
ISSUE WAS BROUGHT TO YOU.
I KNOW THERE'S A LOT
OF CONFUSION IN THE PUBLIC AS
WELL.
>> SO I APPRECIATE YOU TAKING A
MINUTE TO DESCRIBE THAT.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER BREAKS I THINK
YOU AND I THINK IT'S EXACTLY
WHAT YOU JUST STATED THAT GIVES
ME PAUSE ABOUT DOING THIS
BUNDLING THIS ALL TOGETHER.
IT IS A IT IS SIGNIFICANT WORK
FOR FOR CITY STAFF TO GO ON TO
THIS NEXT STAGE OF ISSUING
BONDS.
AND I KNOW THAT I HAVE SOME
QUESTIONS ABOUT THIS.
>> I BELIEVE OTHERS DO AS WELL
AND BEFORE WE AUTHORIZE THE
ADMINISTRATOR AND INSTRUCT THE
ADMINISTRATOR TO TAKE THESE
NEXT STEPS, IT SEEMS LIKE WE
SHOULD WE SHOULD ALL BE REALLY
CONFIDENT THAT DOING THIS WORK
IS IS WHAT WE WHAT WE WANT TO
SEE AND I THINK WE SHOULD WANT
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT IS IN THAT
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT, WHAT
ACTUALLY IS A PROPOSAL BECAUSE
RIGHT NOW WHAT WE HAVE AS A
CONCEPT WHAT DO YOU KNOW ABOUT
THIS PROJECT BESIDES WHAT HAS
SORT OF BEEN TELEGRAPHED TO US?
THERE IS NOT A PLAN YET SO I'D
LOVE TO SEE THAT BEFORE HAVING
US OUR CITY GO THIS NEXT STEP.
COUNCILOR WATSON, I AGREE WITH
COUNCILOR WE'RE BRIGGS THAT
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF PLAN AND I
THINK SOME OF MY COMMENTS
BEFORE I WAS SORT OF SAYING
BROADLY THAT IT'S OK, YOU KNOW,
IT'S IT IS OK FOR
MUNICIPALITIES TO TAKE ON TO
TAKE ON RISK IN THE FORM
OF BONDS AND YOU KNOW, IT'S OK
TO HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT THE TIF
PLANS AND THE COUNTY FINANCE
AUTHORITY PLANS.
YOU KNOW, AND HERE IS OUR
BROWNFIELD AUTHORITY.
>> I HAVE A QUESTION.
WELL, I THINK MAYBE THIS
QUESTION SHOULD BE SAFE FOR THE
WORK SESSION BUT I THINK THE
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT I
MEAN THAT'S GIVING THE CITY
SOME ASSURANCES ON THE RISK AND
SO I GUESS I'LL BE I'LL BE
VOTING AGAINST THIS AMENDMENT
BECAUSE YOU KNOW, I WANT THE
CITY TO INVESTIGATE EVERYTHING
INCLUDING A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
DISTRICT THAT COULD MITIGATE
SOME OF THE RISK.
BUT YOU KNOW, LET'S TALK ABOUT
THAT AT THE WORK.
>> BUT YEAH, I'LL JUST BE
VOTING NO.
MR DELACOURT, IT'S BEEN
SUGGESTED TO ME THAT THERE'S
WISDOM WAITING.
>> I DON'T KNOW ABOUT THAT, MR
MAYOR, BUT I WILL DO MY BEST TO
ADD SOME A LITTLE BIT
OF CLARITY JUST TO MAKE SURE
CURRENTLY WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
PLANS AND PROCESSES THE SITE
PLAN IS SCHEDULED FOR THE APRIL
15TH PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING.
THAT PLAN WILL BE IN FRONT
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
IT IS COMPLETE.
WE ARE PUTTING IT THERE A
LITTLE SOONER THAN WE NORMALLY
DO IN ANTICIPATION OF THERE
BEING A LOT OF QUESTIONS.
BUT IT IS CLOSE AT THIS POINT
TO BEING TECHNICALLY COMPLIANT.
THE BROWNFIELD PLAN FINAL
VERSION IS WITH THE COUNTY.
THE STAFF REPORTS ARE BEING
WRITTEN AND THE REIMBURSEMENT
AGREEMENT IS BEING DRAFTED BY
THE CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS THAT
IS SCHEDULED TO LEAVE FOR MAY
5TH AND CURRENTLY ON THE
SCHEDULE FOR THE PROJECT THE
FIRST BOND ISSUANCE WE'RE
LOOKING AT A SEPTEMBER DAY
WORKING BACKWARDS FROM THAT TO
KEEP THE PROJECT ON SCHEDULE.
SO I JUST WANTED TO ADD A
LITTLE MORE SPECIFICITY THAT
THERE ARE BOTH FINAL BROWNFIELD
PLAN AND A FINAL PLAN CURRENTLY
BEING REVIEWED.
IT'S SCHEDULED FOR FORMAL
APPROVALS AND THAT THE BOND
ISSUANCE, ALTHOUGH MORE
FLEXIBLE IS THE TIMEFRAME WE'RE
WORKING BACK FROM RIGHT NOW A
SEPTEMBER ISSUANCE.
SO THAT DOES CONFLATE A TIME
FRAME A LITTLE BIT COMPARED TO
WHAT I WAS JUST HEARING A FEW
MINUTES AGO.
>> COUNCILOR AMALRIC, MR
DELACOUR, IS THAT SEPTEMBER
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
>> YES.
THANK YOU.
NOW THE BOND ISSUANCE AGAIN IS
DEPENDENT ON A LOT MORE THINGS
BUT THAT IS THE TIME FRAME
WE'RE WORKING BACK FROM.
I JUST DIDN'T WANT THAT TO BE
WHAT STAFF WAS TALKING ABOUT
AND NOT HAVE THAT BE BROUGHT
OUT AT THIS MEETING AS FAR AS
THE CURRENT TIME FRAME FOR
STARTING FURTHER DISCUSSION ON
THE AMENDMENT ROLL-CALL VOTE P
STARTING WITH THE DOES HOUSE
MURKOWSKI HAD ON AN AMENDMENT
NO MAYOR TAYLOR NO FELDSPAR EIR
NO THAT'S ACTION.
YES BECAUSE OF OUR BRIGG'S YES
.
>> FELSBERG CORNELL YES BECAUSE
OF OUR DISH NO COUNCILOR
HARRISON NO CUSTOMER WATSON NO
COUNCILOR OUR YES CUSTOMER A
DENHA NO MOTION FAILS FURTHER
DISCUSSION THE MAIN MOTION
RAKOVA PLEASE STARTING WITH ON
THE MAIN MOTION THE COUNCIL
MURKOWSKI YES COUNTERMARCH 01
OH SORRY YES LAKESIDE YES
CUSTOMER ER YES NO I'M NO
CUSTOMER BRIGS NO CUSTOMER
CORNELL YES CUSTOMER DISH YES
THAT'S RIGHT HARRISON YES
CUSTOMER WATSON YES SIR.
MALIK YES SIR DENHA YES MOTION
CARRIES DC TWO RESOLUTION
APPROVE AMENDMENTS TO THE
COUNCIL RULES MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBER DENHA SECOND ADVISORY
COUNCIL WORKERS HEREIN
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC TWO
COUNCILOR ER YES JUST A JUST A
BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THESE RULE
CHANGES.
THEY DEAL WITH TWO DIFFERENT
PORTIONS OF OUR RULES.
>> ONE IT SEEKS TO GIVE US AN
OPTION THAT DID NOT PREVIOUSLY
EXIST FOR POSTPONING AN ITEM
WHEN WE DON'T HAVE A DATE
CERTAIN THAT WE WANT TO
POSTPONE IT TO AND BECAUSE THAT
OPTION DID NOT EXIST IN THE
RULES WE WERE THE COUNCIL
ACROSS THE YEARS HAS DEFAULTED
TO TABLING WHICH IS A NOT
REALLY CORRECT BECAUSE UNDER
ROBERT'S RULES TABLING DOES NOT
ALLOW FOR DISCUSSION AND IT CAN
BE NOT THAT ANYONE DID THAT
HERE BUT IT CAN BE ABUSED IN
ORDER TO KILL AN ISSUE WITH NO
DISCUSSION WHATSOEVER.
>> SO WE WORKED WITH OUR
INDOMITABLE CITY ATTORNEY TO
COME UP WITH LANGUAGE THAT
ALLOWS US TO POSTPONE SOMETHING
INDEFINITELY AND CREATES SOME
RULES AND GUIDELINES AROUND HOW
TO BRING SOMETHING BACK THE
OTHER THING THAT THESE RULE
CHANGES ADDRESS RELATE TO
COUNCIL EXPENSES AND THESE
CHANGES SEEK TO CLARIFY THE
ROLES OF CITY STAFF AND COUNCIL
WHEN IT COMES TO EXPENSES AND
REPORTING AND RULE FOLLOWING
AND WHO OVERSEES THEM AND WHO
APPROVES THEM AND I THINK THEY
STRENGTHEN THE ETHICS
SURROUNDING THEM AND REALLY
CLARIFY THAT IT'S ON COUNCIL
MEMBERS TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE FOLLOWING CAMPAIGN FINANCE
LAWS AND THAT WE ARE FOLLOWING
THE RULES WITH THE ETHICS RULES
RELATED TO EXPENSES AND YEAH, I
HOPE MY COLLEAGUES WILL SUPPORT
THESE CHANGES FURTHER
DISCUSSION ALL FAVOR POSED IT
IS APPROVED DC THREE RESOLUTION
TO ALIGN CITY OPERATIONS WITH
VISION ZERO AND TWENTY THIRTY
VMT REDUCTION TARGETS BY
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL SECURITY
COUNCIL MIRACLEMAN DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF DC COUNCIL WANTED TO
SAY A FEW WORDS ABOUT WHAT THIS
IS ABOUT
.
>> SO THE CITY AS WE KNOW HAS
MADE COMMITMENTS TO TWO URGENT
GOALS WE TALK ABOUT VISION ZERO
A LOT AT THIS TABLE.
I THINK WE TALK A LOT LESS
ABOUT REDUCTION IN VEHICLE
MILES TRAVELED WHICH WE AIM TO
CUT 50 PERCENT BY 2030.
AS NOTED IN THIS RESOLUTION
THAT WOULD MEAN THAT RIGHT NOW
WE WOULD BE AT FIFTY SORRY FIVE
HUNDRED AND SIXTY ONE MILLION
WHEN WE'RE ACTUALLY AT ONE
POINT ONE BILLION.
SO WE'RE NOT ON TRACK AND AS IT
WAS ALREADY NOTED EARLIER IN
THE MEETING FROM PUBLIC
COMMENTERS, WE HAVE FAILED TO
MEET OUR TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
GOAL OF VISION ZERO ZERO
SERIOUS CRASHES AND DEATHS ON
OUR CITY'S ROADS.
SO WHAT THIS IS YOU KNOW, I
WANT TO BE VERY CLEAR THAT THIS
IS NOT INTENDED TO BE ANOTHER
PERFORMATIVE, YOU KNOW,
STATEMENT OF OUR COMMITMENT TO
THESE GOALS BUT IT'S REALLY
MEANT TO DO IS TO ALIGN THESE
OPERATIONALLY AND I THINK THERE
ARE SEVERAL EXAMPLES.
THERE ARE SEVERAL EXAMPLES
WHERE WE ARE DOING THIS.
I WANT TO GIVE CREDIT WHERE
CREDIT IS DUE.
YOU KNOW, WE HAD TO RECENT
PROJECTS ONE ON THE AGENDA
TONIGHT THAT WE APPROVED FOR
NEXEN ROAD THAT'S INTEGRATING
FACILITIES TO SLOW DOWN CARS TO
PROVIDE SAFE AND COMFORTABLE
OPTIONS FOR PEOPLE ON BIKES.
BUT THERE ARE ALSO EXAMPLES
THAT WE CAN CITE WHERE WE
HAVEN'T REALLY BEEN PUTTING
THESE FIRST AND FOREMOST SO IN
SHORT, THIS ASKS US TO THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO INTEGRATE
VISION ZERO AND OUR VMT GOALS
INTO DEPARTMENT MENTAL WORK
PLANS TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
EXPLICITLY EXPLAIN HOW EACH
PROJECT THAT TOUCHES TRANSIT
SUPPORTS THESE GOALS THAT WE
ALIGN OUR ANNUAL BUDGET TO MEET
THESE TARGETS AND THAT WE
ENGAGE WITH INSTITUTIONAL
PARTNERS SUCH AS U OF M AND THE
ANN ARBOR PUBLIC SCHOOL
DISTRICT TO DEVELOP SHARED
STRATEGIES.
THESE GOALS LUCKILY WE DO HAVE
SOME OF THE SAME CLIMATE GOALS
AS WELL AS SAFETY GOALS SO
THAT'S A BIT ABOUT THAT OUR
YEAH THANK YOU.
>> THIS IS I MEAN IT CAN SEEM
SOMEWHAT PERPLEXING TO FOLKS
RAISED IT IN PUBLIC COMMENT,
RIGHT.
WHILE WE HAVE A RESOLVE CLAUSE
THAT HAS OUR COMMITMENT TO A
GOAL THAT WE'RE CLEARLY NOT
MEETING IN IT AND IT'S
SOMETHING WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO DISCUSS AS A CITY.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN WHEN WE'RE
NOT MEETING A GOAL THAT WE'VE
REALLY CENTERED IS IS CRITICAL.
IT'S EMBEDDED IN OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
IT'S AND LEADED IN OUR CLIMATE
WORK OUR CLIMATE GOALS DEPEND
ON THIS.
>> AND SO I THINK THAT'S
SOMETHING THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION AND COUNCIL WILL
NEED TO TAKE UP IN TERMS
OF SOME OF THIS WORK.
>> BUT I'M GOING TO REMAIN
COMMITTED TO THE FACT THAT THIS
IS THIS IS WORK THAT WE NEED TO
BE CENTERING AND THE REALITY IS
IT'S GETTING MORE CHALLENGING.
RIGHT.
WE CAN SEE WE DON'T HAVE THE
FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR THIS AND SO
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN FOR OUR
BUDGETS KNOWING THAT WE DON'T
HAVE A FEDERAL PARTNER TO BE
ABLE TO THIS FORWARD?
IT'S GOING TO HAVE SOME
BUDGETARY IMPACTS IF WE'RE IF
WE'RE SERIOUS ABOUT THESE
PROJECTS FORWARD AND WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO THINK ABOUT
THAT AND THE FINAL RESOLVE
CLAUSE IS PARTICULARLY
IMPORTANT.
>> WE'VE SEEN AN ISSUE THAT HAS
BECOME FRONT AND CENTER FOR OUR
COMMUNITY AROUND THE SITE
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OF AN AREA
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND WE TRY TO
KEEP KEEP THOSE WE RESPECT
THOSE BOUNDARIES DIFFERENT
INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS.
BUT SOME OF THE DECISIONS THAT
THEY MADE WERE BECAUSE WE DON'T
NECESSARILY HAVE CONSISTENT
DIRECTION FROM WITHIN THE CITY
ORGANIZATION TOWARDS OUR
INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS.
RIGHT.
WHEN WE ASK EVERYONE WHEN WE
ASK INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS, WE
ASK OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO
REMOVE ALL OF THE CAR TRAFFIC
OFF OF OUR STREET GRID THAT
FACILITATES THEM NEEDING TO
REALLY DEVELOP DIFFERENT TYPES
OF CAMPUSES.
RIGHT.
SO THAT HAS HAD IMPLICATIONS
AND WILL BE ONES THAT WE'RE
WE'RE GOING TO PROBABLY HAVE TO
GRAPPLE WITH AT THE COUNCIL
TABLE LATER ON.
BUT WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE ARE ENGAGING OUR
INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERS
CONSISTENTLY WITH THESE VALUES
CENTERED RECOGNIZING THAT YOU
KNOW, ACROSS DIFFERENT
INSTITUTIONS THIS CAN BE A LOT
OF DIFFERENT ISSUES THAT COME
UP OVER TIME AND YOU KNOW, WE
WANT OUR KIDS WALKING AND
BIKING SAFELY TO SCHOOL SO
ANYWAY, THERE'S A LOT THAT CAN
BE SAID ABOUT THIS BUT OUR HOPE
IS THAT WE CONTINUE TO TO THINK
ABOUT WAYS TO IDENTIFY WHY IS
IT THAT WE HAVEN'T AT THE
SCHOOL YET?
IT'S A BIG GOAL CHALLENGING ONE
.
BUT THERE'S MORE WORK THAT CAN
BE DONE ON THIS FURTHER
DISCUSSION.
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
THANK YOU, MAYOR TAYLOR AND I
APPRECIATE COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGG'S ACKNOWLEDGING THAT.
I THINK THERE'S A LOT
OF CONVERSATION WE STILL NEED
TO HAVE AT THE TABLE ABOUT
THESE GOALS AND HOW WE'RE
IMPLEMENTING THEM, PARTICULARLY
AS WE'RE DISCUSSING OUR VISION
ZERO GOALS THAT THAT WE ARE
FAILING TO MEET.
I ALSO WANT TO SPECIFICALLY
POINT I THINK WE'VE TALKED WE
TALK WE DO TALK A LOT I FEEL
ABOUT OUR VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED GOAL AND PARTICULARLY
AS IT RELATES TO THE THE OUR
GOAL FOR CARBON NEUTRALITY AND
I THINK THERE ARE A FEW THINGS
I JUST WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE AS
WE CONTINUE TO HAVE THESE
CONVERSATIONS MOVING FORWARD.
ONE IS THAT I THINK THERE IS
MAYBE SOME VALUE IN HAVING A
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN COMBUSTION
ENGINE VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED
AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED AND AS IT RELATES TO
TO CARBON NEUTRALITY IN
PARTICULAR, I THINK THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO NOTE BECAUSE I
THINK WE'VE HAD A NUMBER
OF DISCUSSIONS ABOUT THE FACT
THAT PEOPLE IN MICHIGAN, ANN
ARBOR ARE CONTINUING TO DRIVE
AND TALKING ABOUT THE WAYS THAT
WE CAN CONTINUE TO SUPPORT A
TRANSITION TO CULTURE AS
OPPOSED TO A TRADITIONAL CAR
CULTURE.
>> I THINK THAT ONE OF THE
OTHER THINGS THAT THAT I THINK
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
STRUGGLE WITH AROUND THIS
PARTICULAR GOAL IS THAT WE NEED
SUPPORT FROM THE REGION AND
FROM THE STATE IN ORDER TO TO
TRULY ACCOMPLISH THIS.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING WE'RE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO ACCOMPLISH AS A
CITY ALONE.
WE DON'T HAVE EFFECTIVE
REGIONAL TRANSIT.
WE DON'T HAVE ENOUGH INVESTMENT
FROM THE STATE IN IN
ALTERNATIVES THAT WOULD ALLOW
FOR PEOPLE TO TO GIVE UP THEIR
VEHICLES AND SO, YOU KNOW, I'M
I'M GOING TO I THINK THIS IS
SOMETHING WE DO NEED TO
CONTINUE TO TALK ABOUT.
BUT I THINK THE REALITY THAT WE
NEED TO ACKNOWLEDGE IS THAT I
THINK WE'RE ALSO POTENTIALLY
SETTING OURSELVES UP TO NOT
MEET THIS GOAL.
AND SO I THINK WE NEED TO HAVE
REALISTIC CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
WHAT THAT MEANS, PARTICULARLY
AS IT RELATES TO EIGHT TO ZERO
FOR THE DISCUSSION OH I'M SORRY
THREE RINGS.
>> YOU KNOW I CAN'T STOP
TALKING ABOUT TRANSPORTATION.
SORRY PLANS AGENDA AND I YOU
KNOW, IT'S A YOU KNOW, IT'S A
THESE ARE AMBITIOUS GOALS RIGHT
?
>> IT IS DIFFICULT FOR OUR
COMMUNITY TO WE ARE CHALLENGING
OURSELVES TO DO AMBITIOUS
THINGS AND TO ALLOW OUR
COMMUNITY TO LIVE IN WAYS THAT
IMPROVE THEIR QUALITY OF LIFE,
IMPROVE THEIR HEALTH, IMPROVE
THE ENVIRONMENT, IMPROVE THE
SAFETY OF OF OF OUR COMMUNITY
AND EACH OF THESE SCHOOLS IS
TIED TO THAT.
SO THERE'S JUST A MULTITUDE
OF WAYS THAT I THINK THESE ARE
IMPORTANT EQUITY TRANSPORTATION
THE SECOND BIGGEST COST IN
PEOPLE'S HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS
PEOPLE OF COLOR ARE VULNERABLE
ARE THE MOST LIKELY TO DIE IN
CAR CRASHES IN THE UNITED
STATES.
SO IT'S YOU KNOW, THERE'S A
WHOLE BUNCH OF DIFFERENT
REASONS WE COME AT THIS WORK A
WHOLE BUNCH OF DIFFERENT ANGLES
AND WE'VE CENTERED A COUPLE
OF THOSE ONES IN THESE
RESOLUTIONS.
BUT THERE'S NO SHORTAGE
OF REASONS WE SHOULD BE DOING
THIS WORK AND BE COMMITTED TO
IT AND FIGURING OUT HOW TO
BUILD A CITY THAT WORKS FOR OUR
WORKS, WORKS FOR OUR COMMUNITY
REALLY WELL IN 50 YEARS FOR THE
DISCUSSION COUNCIL MEMBER.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT THIS
RESOLUTION HAS IT SPECIFIES
REALLY IMPORTANT THINGS THAT WE
COULD AND SHOULD BE DOING.
YOU KNOW, ONE THING THAT I WANT
TO NOTE BECAUSE WE PASS THIS
OURSELVES IS I DIDN'T SEE A
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ATTACHED TO
THIS AND I WANT TO KNOW IF I
GUESS THIS IS FOR YOU CITY
ADMINISTRATOR MR. TONY, THE
ANTICIPATED COSTS WITH SOME
OF THE DIRECTIVES IN THIS
RESOLUTION
I DON'T KNOW THAT I
COULD GIVE YOU A DIRECT ANSWER
JUST SITTING HERE BUT WE
REVIEWED THE RESOLUTION STAFF
PARTICIPATE IN SOME OF THE
EDITS AND WE'RE COMFORTABLE
WITH WHAT THE RESOLUTION SAYS
IS THE BEST WAY I CAN ANSWER
YOU RIGHT NOW.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE CUSTOMER.
>> YEAH, I GUESS I WANTED TO
SPEAK A MORE TO BUDGET AND WHY
WE SPECIFICALLY CALL OUT FOR
THE ANNUAL BUDGET TO EXPLICITLY
SUPPORT SOME OF THESE GOALS AS
I THINK YOU WE UNDERSTAND THAT
WE HAVE A LIMITED AMOUNT
OF RESOURCES THAT WE'RE ALWAYS
DECIDING HOW TO DEPLOY THEM AND
AS COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGGS SAID,
WE CAN PROBABLY EXPECT THAT
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE LESS
OF THOSE GOING FORWARD, AT
LEAST LESS FEDERAL SUPPORT.
BUT I THINK IT HASN'T ALWAYS
BEEN YOU KNOW, IF YOU TAKE A
DEEP DOVE INTO OUR
TRANSPORTATION RELATED AND
ROADS BUDGET, IT'S QUITE
COMPLICATED WITH SEVERAL
DIFFERENT THREADS OF FUNDING
AND WHERE THEY CAN BE ALLOCATED
AND I DON'T THINK IT'S ALWAYS
EASY AS A POLICYMAKER TO TELL
WHERE THERE'S OPPORTUNITY AND
WE'RE JUST NOT PUTTING DOLLARS
TOWARDS TO MEET OUR GOALS OR IF
WE NEED TO MAKE SOME TOUGH
EXPLICIT DECISIONS
.
AND SO I THINK THAT'S ALSO WHAT
THIS IS ASKING.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S PART OF MY
INTENT BEHIND THIS IS TO BETTER
SERVICE THOSE DECISIONS SO THAT
WE CAN MAKE A CONSCIOUS
DECISION ABOUT WHAT WE'RE DOING
AND HOW WE'RE DEPLOYING
RESOURCES INSTEAD OF KIND
OF BEING SURPRISED WHEN WE
DON'T MEET OUR GOALS.
>> BUT THE DISCUSSION YOU KNOW,
I HAVE A JUST A QUICK FOLLOW
QUESTION.
COUNCILMAN BROCKMANN, I
APPRECIATE YOU POINTING OUT THE
BUDGET AND JUST THE NEED TO
REALLY ALIGN OUR BUDGET WITH
OUR PROPOSED WITH OUR GOALS AND
OUR VALUES.
I THINK THAT, YOU KNOW, AS WE
ENTER THIS THIS BUDGET CYCLE
AND WE KNOW THAT THERE'S JUST
SO MANY COMPETING PRIORITIES
WE'RE LOSING GRANTS AND
ORGANIZATIONS ARE IN CRISIS
WHEN THE RESOLUTION SECOND TO
LAST RESOLVE CLAUSE SAYS
DIRECTS THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TO ALIGN ANNUAL BUDGET PROPOSAL
EXPLICITLY REFLECT AND SUPPORT
THE VISION ZERO PLAN IN VMT
REDUCTION.
>> THIS IS A QUESTION AGAIN FOR
YOU, MR. TONY.
>> DO YOU HAVE ANY ESTIMATE IN
REGARDS TO WHAT PROPORTION
OF THAT OF THE BUDGET MAY BE
AFFECTED BY THAT IN YOUR MIND?
IS THERE A PART THAT COULD BE
USED FOR THIS JUST SO WE HAVE A
BETTER IDEA?
>> NO, THERE'S NO SPECIFIC PART
BECAUSE THE FUNDING FOR THIS
COMES FROM MULTIPLE AREAS.
SO BEING ABLE TO DETERMINE, YOU
KNOW WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
PROPOSE TO BE ALLOCATED I CAN'T
GIVE YOU THAT ANSWER TONIGHT
OBVIOUSLY COUNCIL HAS THE
ULTIMATE SAY OVER THE WAY THE
BUDGET IS APPROVED.
>> I MIGHT BE ABLE TO TALK MORE
SPECIFICALLY ABOUT IT ON THE
21ST BUT I CAN'T DO THAT THIS
EVENING.
>> THANK YOU FOR FURTHER
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR OPPOSED IT
IS APPROVED.
>> YOU JUST HAVE ONE MORE IT'S
POWER THROUGH DC FIVE
RESOLUTION REGARDING THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND A LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY MOVE
BY JUST JUST A LITTLE NOTHING.
>> COUNCILMAN MOVE BY
COUNCILMAN SECONDED BY COUNCIL
OR DENHA DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH SORRY THERE'S
THERE'S CONFUSION HERE BUT
ANYWAY SO THIS RESOLUTION AIMS
TO SET THE UPCOMING ROUND
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT ON THE
FOUNDATION PROVIDED BY OVER A
YEAR OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT TO
DATE I UNDERSTAND THAT WHEN A
CITY MAKES AN UPDATE TO ITS
COMPREHENSIVE LANDY'S PLAN AND
UPDATE THAT IS NOT ONLY LEGAL
BUT THAT CITIES ARE ACTUALLY
REQUIRED TO DO BY STATE LAW THE
ONLY REQUIRED PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
IS A 63 DAY PERIOD THAT OCCURS
NEAR THE END OF THE PROCESS.
WE HAVE BEEN CONDUCTING PUBLIC
STAFF HAS BEEN CONDUCTING
PUBLIC EDUCATION FOR OVER A
YEAR NOW AND IT WILL PICK UP
AGAIN THIS SUMMER AND WE WILL
EVENTUALLY IN THE END OF AUGUST
WHICH I DON'T EVEN WANT TO
THINK ABOUT BECAUSE I'M SO COLD
NOW I DON'T ON AUGUST TO EVER
END THAT 63 DAY PERIOD WILL
BEGIN ONLY THEN SO WE WILL HAVE
HAD MOUNTAINS OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AND I WANT TO FOCUS
ON ABOUT 500 PEOPLE WHO ARE
PART OF THE 4000 TOTAL WHO HAVE
ENGAGED SO FAR THOSE 500 PEOPLE
CAME TO IN-PERSON MEETINGS AND
RESPONDED TO QUESTIONS ABOUT
ACCEPTABLE DENSITY IN LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS AND
THEIR ANSWERS CONSISTENTLY WERE
THAT THEY WOULD BE HAPPY TO SEE
THREE STORY DEVELOPMENT AND
THAT THEY ACTUALLY THOUGH
INITIALLY THEY WERE INTERESTED
IN TALKING ABOUT UNIT LIMITS.
ULTIMATELY THEY CAME TO THE
CONCLUSION THAT THEY DIDN'T
REALLY CARE SO MUCH ABOUT HOW
MANY UNITS WERE IN A PLACE THEY
CARED ABOUT HOW WELL IT FIT IN
THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS.
THIS IS A GREAT ORGANIC
EMERGING CONSENSUS.
>> IT DOES NOT REPRESENT THE
CITY.
IT'S NOT SUPPOSED TO IT WAS
SUPPOSED TO PROVIDE A BASIS FOR
THE ENGAGEMENT ON THE DRAFT
PLAN.
>> BUT WE WERE HAVING WE WERE
HEARING REPORTS WE HEARD ONE
TONIGHT ABOUT THE CONTENTS
OF THAT DRAFT PLAN SPOKEN AS IF
PEOPLE HAD READ IT WHEN THE
DRAFT PLAN HAS NOT YET BEEN
RELEASED.
>> SO I AM PUZZLED BY CLAIMS
ABOUT WHAT IT CONTAINS THOSE
CLAIMS WERE EXTREMELY
MISREPRESENTATIVE ATTRIBUTING
TO THE COPPERHEADS LAND USE
POWERS.
IT DOES NOT HAVE TO WAIVE CITY
REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT FOR EXAMPLE.
>> AND THIS HAS NOT AT ALL
ALLOWED THE ENGAGEMENT THAT WE
HAVE SPENT SO MUCH TIME AND
MONEY ON TO FEED ORGANICALLY
INTO A SECOND WAVE
OF ENGAGEMENT AND THAT IS WHY
THIS RESOLUTION IS HERE BECAUSE
WE WANT TO AFFIRM SOMETHING
THAT CAME OUT OF THIS
ENGAGEMENT THAT IS A RARE AND
UNIQUE THING WHICH IS A
COMMUNITY SAYING YES, WE WOULD
LIKE TO WE WOULD LIKE TO SEE AN
INCREASE IN DENSITY THROUGHOUT
THE CITY AND THIS IS WHAT WOULD
WORK FOR US IN LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL AND IN OTHER PLACES
.
THERE HASN'T BEEN THAT KIND
OF AGREEMENT THAT IN FACT YES,
THROUGHOUT THE CITY WE WOULD
ACCEPT INCREASED RESIDENTIAL
AND EVEN IN MINNEAPOLIS WHICH
IS TOUTED AS AN EXAMPLE AND IT
IS IN MANY WAYS THOSE
COMMITMENTS TO INCREASED
DENSITY WERE FOUGHT AND ROLLED
BACK AT THE ZONING PHASE SO
THAT THEY HAVE A 2.5 STOREY
HEIGHT LIMIT AND FAA ARE
RESTRICTIONS THAT MAKE THE
THINGS THAT THEY'RE ZONING.
>> SORRY, I'LL COME BACK TO
THAT.
BRIAN, THANK YOU.
SO I'VE HEARD FROM MANY
RESIDENTS I KNOW WE ALL HAVE
ABOUT THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN UPDATE SOME WHO THINKS
THAT THE DIRECTION SO FAR GOES
TOO FAR AND OTHERS WHO FEEL IT
DOESN'T GO FAR ENOUGH.
AND HERE'S WHERE I STAND AND
WHY THIS MOMENT MATTERS.
FIRST IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE
THAT THE LAND USE PLAN IS NOT A
ZONING CHANGE.
IT'S A LONG TERM ROADMAP FOR
HOW WE WANT OUR CITY TO GROW.
IT DOESN'T REZONE ANYTHING BY
ITSELF THAT COMES LATER AND BY
STATE LAW WE'RE SUPPOSED TO
UPDATE THE LAND USE PLAN EVERY
FIVE TO TEN YEARS.
OURS HASN'T BEEN UPDATED SINCE
TWO AND NINE.
THAT'S SIXTEEN YEARS
OF INACTION.
WHILE HOUSING PRICES SOARED,
OUR DIVERSITY DECLINED AND
PEOPLE WHO BELONG IN ANN ARBOR
PEOPLE OF COLOR, TEACHERS,
NURSES, SERVICE WORKERS WERE
PRICED OUT.
THIS UPDATE IS LONG OVERDUE AND
WE HAVE A MORAL RESPONSIBILITY
TO DO BETTER.
SINCE MY FIRST CAMPAIGN IN
TWENTY TWENTY I'VE BEEN CLEAR
THAT I SUPPORT ENDING
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING AND
ALLOWING DUPLEXES AND TRIPLE XS
IN RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
WITHIN THE SAME BUILDING SCALE
GENERALLY THAT WE ALREADY
ALLOW.
I OFTEN SAID IF WE ALLOW BIG
MILLION DOLLAR HOMES TO BE
BUILT FOR ONE FAMILY WE SHOULD
ALLOW HOMES OF THE SAME SIZE
THAT COULD HOUSE TWO OR THREE
FAMILIES.
THAT KIND OF GENTLE DENSITY CAN
HELP MAKE OUR COMMUNITY MORE
INCLUSIVE, MORE SUSTAINABLE AND
MORE AFFORDABLE THOUGH NOT JUST
FOR THOSE WHO WOULD LIKE TO
LIVE HERE FOR CURRENT RESIDENTS
AS WE AGE AND WE NEED TO
DOWNSIZE OR AS OUR KIDS GROW UP
AND LOOK FOR HOUSING NEARBY.
ALL THAT SAID, IT'S IMPORTANT
TO KEEP IN MIND THAT WHEN IT
COMES TO BIG HOUSING GAINS ONE
THE EXPANSION OF DOWNTOWN AND
THE NEW MIXED USE TAX DISTRICTS
ARE WHERE WE WILL ACTUALLY SEE
NEW HOUSING, NEW HOUSING IN
NUMBERS THAT WILL MAKE A DENT
IN OUR HOUSING CRISIS.
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL IS A VERY
LONG TERM STRATEGY TO THE
PROCESS PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT HAS
BEEN EXTENSIVE AND IT'S ALL
BEEN OVER AND ABOVE WHAT'S
REQUIRED BY LAW.
>> THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS HAVE
PARTICIPATED SO FAR AND WHAT
WE'VE HEARD SO FAR SHOWS
SUPPORT FOR ALLOWING UP TO
FOURPLEX IN SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOODS AS PART OF A
BROADER STRATEGY TO OPEN UP
MORE HOUSING.
>> BUT THE ENGAGEMENT IS FAR
FROM OVER ONCE THE DRAFT PLAN
IS FINALIZED, THERE WILL BE
MORE ENGAGEMENT SESSIONS THAT
SIXTY THREE DAY PUBLIC COMMENT
PERIOD AND PUBLIC HEARINGS AT
BOTH PLANNING COMMISSION AND
CITY COUNCIL.
THERE WILL BE MANY MORE CHANCES
TO WEIGH IN BEFORE ANYTHING IS
ADOPTED AND ONCE THAT PLAN IS
IN PLACE, ANY FUTURE ZONING
CHANGES WILL STILL GO THROUGH
THEIR OWN DETAILED PUBLIC
PROCESS WHERE WE'LL TALK ABOUT
LOT SIZES, HEIGHT, PARKING
SETBACKS AND HOW NEW HOUSING
FITS INTO EACH NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> SO THIS PLAN THE CRITICAL
STEP TOWARDS A MORE INCLUSIVE
SUSTAINABLE FUTURE AND WE NEED
A NEW PLAN THAT REFLECTS OUR
VALUES AND GOALS BUT WE ALSO
NEED ONE THAT HAS ENOUGH
SUPPORT TO ACTUALLY BE
IMPLEMENTED WHEN WE GET TO THE
ZONING PHASE.
SO IT'S CRITICAL THAT WE
NAVIGATE HOW TO MOVE THIS PLAN
FORWARD IN A WAY THAT BUILDS
AND MAINTAINS PUBLIC TRUST AND
THAT'S WHY I SPONSORED THIS
RESOLUTION, CO-SPONSORED THIS
RESOLUTION AND I HOPE MY
COLLEAGUES WILL SUPPORT IT.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL, I
DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY WE'RE
DOING THIS NOW WHEN THERE
HASN'T BEEN A DRAFT PLAN
RELEASED AND SO TO ME IT DOES
FEEL VERY REACTIONARY TO SOME
OF THE LOUDER VOICES THAT WE'RE
HEARING, SOME OF WHOM IF YOU DO
A QUICK GOOGLE SEARCH YOU WILL
FIND HOMES OPPOSED EVERY
REZONING EFFORT SINCE LIKE 2008
.
>> SO NOT SURPRISING TO TO HEAR
THERE'S AND I HAVEN'T CHANGED
OUR TEAM.
I APPRECIATE CONSISTENCY BUT
NOT IN THIS REGARD.
I WOULD FEEL COMFORTABLE
SUPPORTING THIS IF WE HAD
SOMETHING TO REACT TO.
BUT THE WAY THAT US IS BEING
BROUGHT FORWARD I FEEL LIKE IS
IF WE'RE ACKNOWLEDGING THAT
CITY COUNCIL DOES NOT DRAFT THE
LAND PLAN BUT WE'RE ALSO
INSTRUCTING PLANNING COMMISSION
TO PUT RESTRICTIONS ON WHAT
DOESN'T EVEN EXIST YET IT FEELS
OUT OF TURN.
I REALLY WOULD FEEL COMFORTABLE
IF WE HAD A PLAN IN FRONT OF US
THAT WE WERE REACTING TO VERSUS
JUST WHAT TO ME FEELS LIKE A
REALLY GROSS LOOK THAT THE
LOUDEST VOICES IN ARE GOING TO
SILENCE ALL OF THE PUBLIC
INPUT
THAT WE'VE HEARD AND I
UNDERSTAND THAT WE WANT TO
COMPROMISE AND FIND SOMETHING
THAT WORKS FOR EVERYBODY.
I JUST DON'T THINK WE'RE THERE
YET.
SO I WOULD I WOULD BE MORE
COMFORTABLE IF WE WAITED IF WE
POSTPONED THIS UNTIL AFTER WE
ACTUALLY HAVE A DRAFT PLAN
VERSUS REACTING TO OUR
PERCEIVED CONSENSUS OF WHAT
REALLY IS IS NOT HAS PLAYED OUT
I THINK IN A WAY THAT INDICATES
THIS IS NECESSARY AT THIS
MOMENT.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER ECKMANN,
THANK YOU.
I WANT TO START BY SAYING THAT
I APPRECIATE THE THOUGHTFULNESS
AND THE WAY THAT PEOPLE ARE
APPROACHING THIS.
I KNOW THAT WE'RE ALL HEARING
FROM A LOT OF PEOPLE BUT I DO
THINK WE NEED TO RESPECT A
PROCESS THAT'S ALREADY UNDERWAY
AS I BELIEVE EVERYBODY HAS
SPOKEN SO FAR HAS NOTED PUBLIC
INPUT AND THE ENGAGEMENT IS
ONGOING.
IT HASN'T ENDED.
WE DON'T EVEN HAVE A DRAFT PLAN
.
SO FOR COUNCIL TO STEP IN NOW
AND LIKE IN A SPECIFIC OUTCOME
LIKE A THIRTY FIVE FOOT HEIGHT
LIMIT SEEMS REALLY PREMATURE
AND I WOULD ALSO NOTE THAT YOU
KNOW, I DO THINK THIS IS
REACTING TO A CERTAIN NARRATIVE
THAT'S BEEN IN OUR COMMUNITY
BUT THERE'S A LOT THERE THAT
WE'RE YOU KNOW, WE'RE NOT
REACTING TO ZERO SET BACKS.
DO WE WANT TO GET INTO SETBACKS
SPECIFIC?
SO I MEAN I DON'T THINK THAT WE
DO SO I THINK THIS IS KIND
OF UNDERMINING THE ROLE OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION, THE MONTHS
OF ENGAGEMENT THAT WE'VE
ALREADY ASKED THE COMMUNITY TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE TENS DOZENS
OF EMAILS I'VE SENT TO PEOPLE
SAYING PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT IS NOT
OVER.
WELCOME.
YOU KNOW, WE WANT TO HEAR YOUR
INPUT PLEASE.
THE DRAFT ISN'T OUT YET.
I'M ALSO JUST CONCERNED ABOUT
SETTING THIS ARBITRARY CAP ON
HEIGHT.
I MEAN I AGREE.
I THINK THAT WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE TO HAVE A CONVERSATION
ABOUT SCALE THAT FITS WITHIN
EXISTING NEIGHBORHOODS.
I I FULLY SUPPORT THAT
DIRECTION BUT I THIRTY FIVE
FEET I DON'T KNOW IS IT THIRTY
FIVE FEET IS IT THREE STORIES.
IS IT FOUR STORIES.
I HAVE NO IDEA AT THIS POINT SO
I THINK SCALE IS IMPORTANT.
HEIGHT ALONE DOESN'T CAPTURE
THAT.
YOU KNOW I'VE ALSO HEARD A LOT
OF PEOPLE CITE MINNEAPOLIS
SAYING THAT ONLY ONE PERCENT
OF NEW HOUSING CAME FROM LOW
DENSITY ZONES AND I THINK
THAT'S EXACTLY THE POINT.
LEGALIZING MORE HOUSING TYPES
DOESN'T LEAD TO OVERNIGHT
TRANSFORMATION BUT IT DOES GIVE
OPTIONS FOR HOMEOWNERS, RENTERS
AND DEVELOPERS ALIKE AND THAT'S
WHAT WE NEED.
WE NEED MORE FLEXIBILITY, NOT
FEAR.
AND SO I DON'T WANT TO ACT ON
FEAR I THINK YEAH.
LET'S LISTEN LET'S LET'S GET
THE DRAFT OUT THERE.
LET'S DO THE WORK.
AS PEOPLE HAVE SAID, WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO DO THE HARD
WORK OF THE ZONING ANYWAY.
SO EVEN IF WE SUPPOSEDLY SETTLE
THIS THIRTY FIVE FEET WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE THIS DISCUSSION
ALL OVER AGAIN SO I'M QUOTING
NOW CAN'T REMEMBER BREEKS.
I WANT TO THINK THAT THIS THE
THE FOLKS WHO BROUGHT THIS
FORWARD I UNDERSTAND WHERE THIS
IS COMING FROM.
>> I UNDERSTAND THAT IT'S A
DESIRE TO BE RESPONSIVE TO TO
THE TO THE EMAILS THAT WE'VE
RECEIVED AND THERE'S WE'VE
RECEIVED A LOT AND I THINK WE
CAN ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THEY
HAVEN'T NECESSARILY BEEN
CONSISTENT.
>> RIGHT.
BUT THEY HAVE THEY THEY'VE LEAN
IN A CERTAIN DIRECTION.
RIGHT.
AND SO THERE'S A DESIRE TO
RESET BACK TO A CONVERSATION
THAT WAS EXISTING LAST FALL AND
AS MUCH AS YOU KNOW THAT
CONVERSATION IS HAPPENING LAST
FALL PROBABLY FALLS SQUIRREL IS
PRETTY CONSISTENT WITH MY OWN
PERSONAL BELIEFS.
THE REALITY IS OUR THE
COMMUNITY IS IS HAVING A VERY
DIFFERENT CONVERSATION RIGHT
NOW AND HONESTLY THAT'S WHILE
IT'S NOT FACTUAL AND IT'S
DISTORTED AND THERE'S A LOT
OF THINGS THAT WE WISH THAT IT
WAS IT WAS OCCURRING
DIFFERENTLY.
IT'S PRETTY EXCITING.
FOLKS ARE FINALLY ENGAGED IN
OUR IN OUR COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLANNING PROCESS AND SO WE
HAD A BUNCH OF FOLKS FOUR
THOUSAND PEOPLE WHO'VE ALREADY
ENGAGED.
THAT'S INCREDIBLE.
>> AND NOW WE HAVE MORE AND
THIS IS OUR OPPORTUNITY TO
CONTINUE TO EDUCATE THEM ON THE
PROCESS.
>> AND SO I SAY THIS A LITTLE
BIT.
YOU KNOW, I OBVIOUSLY SERVED ON
PLANNING COMMISSION A COUPLE
OF TIMES OF YOU KNOW, THAT I
REALLY LIKE PROCESS.
>> I BRING IT UP A LOT.
WE DON'T HAVE A DRAFT PLAN YET.
I THINK IT'S REALLY APPROPRIATE
THAT WE WOULD I THINK THERE
MIGHT BE A TIME WHERE WE NEED
TO PROVIDE SOME DIRECTION TO
PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> BUT I THINK THIS IS A LITTLE
BIT PREMATURE.
WE ARE I WOULD SUGGEST THAT WE
POSTPONE THIS WE WAIT.
WE SEE WHAT THE PLAN SAYS.
WE HAVE WE HAVE SOME SENSE
OF WHAT YOU KNOW, PLANNING
STAFF HAS ALREADY GIVEN US SOME
HINTS ABOUT WHAT'S COMING.
BUT PLANNING COMMISSIONERS HAVE
ALSO ASKED GIVEN US SOME HINTS
OF WHAT'S COMING.
THEY HAVE ASKED FOR SOME TIME
TO LOOK AT THE PLAN AND REFLECT
ON PUBLIC COMMENT AND REFLECT
HOW TO CONTACT IN THE CONTEXT
OF THE PLAN.
AND SO WE HAVE THIS BODY THAT
WE'VE CHARGED WITH DOING THIS
WORK FOR US.
>> LET'S THEN LET'S LET THEM DO
THEIR JOBS.
AND YOU KNOW, THERE MAY BE A
POINT THAT WE WANT TO WEIGH IN
AND THERE MAY BE SOME OTHER
POINTS THAT WE WANT TO WEIGH IN
WITH.
BUT LET'S DO THAT IN THE
CONTEXT OF ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
THANK YOU, MAYOR.
YOU KNOW, I CAMPAIGNED FOR CITY
COUNCIL PROMISING TO ADDRESS
OUR CITY'S LONGSTANDING HOUSING
CRISIS, PARTICULARLY FOR THE
LOW AND MIDDLE INCOME FAMILIES
WHO INCREASE WHO INCREASINGLY
FIND THEMSELVES PRICED OUT
OF ANN ARBOR IN ORDER TO
FULFILL THIS PROMISE AND FOSTER
MORE INCLUSIVE, VIBRANT,
AFFORDABLE AND SUSTAINABLE
COMMUNITY.
I BELIEVE WE MUST EMBRACE
GENTLE GROWTH THROUGHOUT OUR
CITY AND COMMIT TO ENDING
RESTRICTIVE AND EXCLUSIONARY
ZONING PRACTICES.
THE RESTRICTIVE AND
EXCLUSIONARY ZONING PRACTICES
OF THE PAST CURRENTLY OVER HALF
OF ANN ARBOR TO DEVELOP A LAND
DEVELOPER LAND IS RESTRICTED BY
OUTDATED ZONING LAWS THAT
PROHIBIT MEANINGFUL MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING.
THIS REALITY NOT ONLY LIMITS
OUR HOUSING SUPPLY BUT ALSO
ELEVATES PRICES WHICH HAS MADE
IT DIFFICULT IF NOT IMPOSSIBLE
FOR LOW AND MIDDLE INCOME
FAMILIES TO FIND HOMES.
THIS ECONOMIC EXCLUSION IS
NEITHER JUST NOR ACCEPTABLE AND
HAS RESULTED IN THE ANN ARBOR
AREA BECOMING ONE OF THE MOST
ECONOMICALLY SEGREGATED IN THE
COUNTRY.
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING
PROCESS PRESENTS US WITH AN
OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE A VISIONARY
STATEMENT ABOUT ABOUT FUTURE
GROWTH THAT CAN GUIDE OUR CITY
CITY IN A BETTER, MORE
PROGRESSIVE DIRECTION WHILE
ALSO MAINTAINING UNIQUE,
LIVABLE AND CLOSE KNIT
NEIGHBORHOODS THROUGH EXTENSIVE
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
THE CITY HAS ALREADY GATHERED
FEEDBACK FROM THOUSANDS
OF RESIDENTS AND A CLEAR
COMMUNITY CONSENSUS HAS STARTED
TO EMERGE IN SUPPORT OF A THREE
STORY MULTIFAMILY HOUSING AND
PROPOSED LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
AREAS.
A CITY WIDE.
THIS CONSENSUS NOT ONLY
SUPPORTS ELIMINATING
RESTRICTIVE EXCLUSIONARY ZONING
BUT IT ALSO PRESENTS ANN ARBOR
WITH AN OPPORTUNITY THAT OTHER
CITIES RARELY HAVE TO DO TO
DRAFT A PROGRESSIVE AND
INCLUSIVE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
THAT ENVISIONS THE POSSIBILITY
OF DIVERSE MULTIFAMILY HOUSING
OPTIONS IN EVERY PART OF OUR
CITY TO REALISTICALLY CONFRONT
OUR HOUSING SHORTFALL AND TO DO
SO WITH BROAD PUBLIC SUPPORT
THROUGH PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
TO DATE, RESIDENTS HAVE
INDICATED THEY ARE READY FOR
CHANGE, READY TO EMBRACE THE
GENTLE GROWTH OF NEW HOUSING
OPTIONS OF NEW HOUSING TYPES
THROUGHOUT ANN ARBOR.
I BELIEVE THAT SHIFTING FROM
THE PREVIOUSLY SUGGESTED THREE
STORIES THAT HAS BEEN THE FOCUS
OF MOST PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT TO
DATE TO SUDDENLY POTENTIALLY
FOUR STORIES WE RISK AN EROSION
OF THAT PUBLIC SUPPORT AND
TRUST WITH GREAT RESPECT FOR
OUR PLANNING PROCESS IN OUR
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS, I
BELIEVE IT IS IMPERATIVE THAT
NO SEIZE ON THIS MOMENT AND
THIS MOMENTUM TO INTEGRATE MORE
HOMES AND FAMILIES INTO OUR
EXISTING NEIGHBORHOODS AND TO
DO SO IN A WAY THAT RESPECTS
AND ACKNOWLEDGES A WIDESPREAD
COMMUNITY FEEDBACK WE'VE
RECEIVED TO DATE.
THAT'S WHY I'M SUPPORTING THIS
RESOLUTION.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER WALSON AT ITS
CORE, THIS RESOLUTION ASKS
COUNCIL TO AFFIRM THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT DONE ON OUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OF CONVEYING
A REQUEST TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO HEW TO
CONCLUSIONS FROM FROM THAT
ENGAGEMENT BY RECOMMENDING
THREE STORIES AND THIRTY FIVE
FEET HIGH AND PROVIDING
POTENTIAL TOOLS FOR
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN
THROUGH ZONING VIA A FORM BASED
CODE .
>> THE START OF THE PLANNING
PROCESS WAS AN EXPRESSION
OF CITY VALUES NAMELY THE
HARBOR WE STRIVE TO BE MORE
AFFORDABLE, EQUITABLE,
SUSTAINABLE AND DYNAMIC IN
DEVELOPING THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND IMPLEMENTING THROUGH
ZONING WE ARE SEEKING TOOLS TO
REACH THAT GOAL I MYSELF'S BOOK
ABOUT GENERAL DENSITY WHILE
LOCKING DOORS IN 2022 OVER THE
LAST YEAR ENGAGEMENT ON THIS
PLAN HAS SHOWN BROAD COMMUNITY
SUPPORT FOR INCREASING DENSITY
AND SINGLE FAMILY AREAS.
COUNCIL TO THIS POINT HASN'T
SPOKEN ON THIS ENGAGEMENT.
I THINK IF WE WERE TO POSTPONE
IT WOULD APPEAR AS A MORE
DIRECT RESPONSE TO THE DRAFTS
RATHER THAN RATHER THAN WHAT I
VIEW AS RATIFYING THE
ENGAGEMENT THAT HAS BEEN DONE.
>> IF YOU TOLD ME, YOU KNOW
FIVE OR TEN YEARS AGO THAT ANN
ARBOR WOULD HAVE RECEIVED 70
PERCENT SUPPORT FOR FOR
INCREASED DENSITY IN IN THESE
AREAS AFTER FOURTH IN PERSON
AND ONLINE SURVEY RESPONSES, I
WOULD BE REALLY SURPRISED.
I THINK THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
THAT WE SHOULD UPLIFT AND AND
RATIFY IN A WAY.
>> I REVIEWED THE APRIL FIRST
PLANNING COMMISSION MEETING AND
REALLY I HAD TO WATCH IT TWICE
TO KIND OF UNDERSTAND IT.
IT IS A FAIR POINT THAT HEIGHT
LIMITS ARE USUALLY CONSIDERED
TO BE A PART OF ZONING RATHER
THAN THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
BUT THE FACT REMAINS THAT STAFF
PRESENTED A SUMMARY OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT INCLUDED A
THIRTY FIVE FOOT HEIGHT LIMIT.
SOME MUNICIPALITIES INCLUDING
NEARBY PLYMOUTH IN NORTHFIELD
AS A PLANNING COMMISSION I
BROUGHT UP INCLUDE HEIGHT IN
THEIR PLAN.
>> DURING THE SAME MEETING
STAFF MENTIONED THAT FOUR
STORIES AND FORTY EIGHT FEET IS
IN THE CURRENT DRAFT WHICH
AGAIN HAS IT BEEN RELEASED TO
PLANNING COMMISSION OR COUNCIL
THAT WAS JUST SPOKEN BY
PLANNING STAFFERS.
AT SOME POINT THE CITY WILL
HAVE TO DISCUSS HEIGHT AND THEN
THIS RESOLUTION WE SPECIFY
THIRTY FIVE FEET PERSONALLY I
WOULD HAVE LIKED THE THIRTY
FIVE FEET TO BE MORE OF A FOR
EXAMPLE THAN A HARD LIMIT BUT
AFTER DISCUSSING AFTER
DISCUSSION WITH MY CO-SPONSORS
I DECIDED I COULD LIVE WITHOUT
SPECIFYING THIRTY FIVE FEET I
WOULDN'T SUPPORT THE THREE
STOREY AND THIRTY FIVE FOOT
REQUEST THE PLANNING COMMISSION
IF I THOUGHT IT WOULD CAP THE
PLAN.
WE KNOW IN MINNESOTA ONLY ONE
PERCENT OF NEW DUPLEXES AND
TRIPLEX IS BUILT IN THE WAKE
OF ZONING REFORM WERE BUILT IN
FORMERLY SINGLE FAMILY AREAS.
SO THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THREE
AND FOUR STORIES I THINK WILL
HAVE A MINOR DIFFERENCE IN HOW
MANY NEW PEOPLE WE CAN RECORD.
WELCOME INTO OUR CITY AND A
NOTE IN DEFENSE OF THE CITY'S
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS HAVE
MUCH APPRECIATED THE PLANNING
COMMISSIONER'S COMMENT LAST
MONDAY THAT THEY ARE
DELIBERATING IN A FISHBOWL IN
ANN ARBOR.
WE ASK OUR RESIDENTS TO
CONSIDER BIG IDEAS WITH LONG
TERM CONSEQUENCES IN PUBLIC AND
ON VIDEO AND TO SERVE ON THE
COMMISSIONS.
COMPETENT AND COMPENSATED
PLANNING COMMISSION ALSO HAS
VERY STRICT RECUSAL STANDARDS
AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST
DISCLOSURES IN ITS BYLAWS FOR
THOSE WHO WANT TO IMPUGN THE
MOTIVES OF PLANNING,
COMMISSIONERS CRITICIZE THEIR
EMPLOYERS.
THEY SAY THAT A BODY APPOINTED
BY THE MAYOR AND CONFIRMED BY
THE COUNCIL CAN'T BE RESPONSIVE
TO PUBLIC FEEDBACK.
I WOULD CAUTION AGAINST THIS
LINE OF CRITICISM BECAUSE IT
COULD BE APPLIED TO ANY OF OUR
CITY COMMISSIONS.
>> COUNCILOR FURTHER DISCUSSION
COUNCIL MEMBER, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU COLLEAGUES.
>> EVERYONE IS BEING SO
THOUGHTFUL AS USUAL.
SO WHY ARE WE TALKING NUMBERS
AT SOME POINT DURING THE
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
TEAM INTRODUCED NUMBERS INTO
THE MIX.
>> THEY DID AS SEVERAL PEOPLE
HAVE NOTED, START TALKING ABOUT
35 FEET IN THREE STORIES TO
REASSURE PEOPLE THAT WE WERE
NOT PLANNING TO PLANT A TEN
STOREY HIGH RISE NEXT DOOR AND
CURRENTLY SINGLE FAMILY ZONES
AND LITERALLY THAT'S ONE THING
THAT PEOPLE WERE WORRIED ABOUT.
>> SO WHY ARE WE TALKING ABOUT
THIS NOW?
I AM GLAD THAT WE HAVE MORE
PEOPLE ENGAGED IN THE PLANNING
PROCESS.
>> I'M GLAD THEY ARE SHOWING UP
BUT THEY ARE SHOWING UP PRIMED
FOR SUSPICION PRETTY CONVINCED
THAT THEY'VE FALLEN VICTIM TO A
BAIT AND SWITCH BECAUSE WE WERE
TALKING 35 FEET AND PEOPLE IN
THE PLANNING CONDITION MYSELF
INCLUDED LOUD AND CLEARLY SAID
THAT WASN'T ENOUGH AND WE
THOUGHT FORTY EIGHT WOULD BE
BETTER.
MOREOVER THEY ARE HAVING A
DEBATE THAT I BELIEVE WILL MAKE
IT DIFFICULT TO BUILD THE KIND
OF COALITION A COALITION OF THE
REASONABLE THAT WE WILL NEED TO
GET THIS PLAN APPROVED AND
IMPLEMENTED THROUGH ZONING
CHANGES.
>> SO I AM NOT RESPONDING TO
THE OBJECTIONS THAT THAT PEOPLE
WHO WILL NEVER BE CONVINCED TO
ADD DENSITY TO RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOODS I'M NOT
RESPONDING TO THEIR OBJECTIONS
.
I AM TRYING TO FIGHT BACK
AGAINST WHAT THEY ARE DOING TO
MY DEBATE MY DEBATE AS A MEMBER
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION I
THINK IT NEEDS A RESET.
>> I THINK I NEED TO MAKE IT
CLEAR THAT I HEARD WHAT THE
COMMUNITY WAS SAYING THAT I
REGRET MY STATEMENTS THAT WERE
NOT OPEN TO THEIR VOICES AND
THAT LAUNCHES THIS NEXT PHASE
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT WITH A
CLEAR DEMONSTRATION THAT WE ARE
NOT A UNIFIED FIST PUTTING FIST
ON THE SCALES.
>> I'M RUNNING OUT OF MY
METAPHOR SO I SHOULD STOP OUR
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL I WITH
RESPECT I FEEL LIKE THIS IS
EXACTLY THAT THAT WE'RE PUTTING
OUR FIRST ON THE SCALE I THINK
I KNOW HOW THIS WILL GO BUT I
WOULD STILL LIKE TO MAKE A
MOTION TO POSTPONE THIS UNTIL
THE DRAFT PLAN COMES TO COMES
BEFORE IS MADE PUBLIC.
>> IS THERE A SECOND
ANNOUNCEMENT BRINGS DISCUSSION
?
YES, THAT'S INTERESTING.
THAT'S TO THE I ASSUME THE NEXT
COUNCIL MEETING AFTER THE
RELEASE OF THE DRAFT, CORRECT?
>> YEAH, WE JUST VOTED WE HAVE
THE SAME EXCITING SO SAGE
COUNCIL THAT HAS A PROVISION
OF THIS NATURE.
>> IT'S SOMETHING ELSE
COUNTERMARCH YOU STOLE THE
FLOOR WITH RESPECT TO
POSTPONEMENT, I WOULD REALLY
LIKE TO BE REACTING TO
SOMETHING OTHER THAN A VERY
THOUGHTFUL YET UNDENIABLE
PERCEPTION OF WHAT CONSENSUS
MEANS FOR FURTHER DISCUSSION
OF POSTPONEMENT.
FOR MY PART I TO VOTE AGAINST
THE POSTPONEMENT WE CAN TALK
MORE ABOUT I'LL TALK MORE ABOUT
THE MERITS OF THIS PARTICULAR
RESOLUTION NOW.
BUT I THINK PART OF THE MERITS
OF THIS OF THIS RESOLUTION IS
ITS TIMELINESS.
CATHERINE BRINGS THEM AKMAN
ACKMANN THEN BRIGS I WANTED TO
HEAR FROM YOU BOTH IN WHATEVER
ORDER YOU CHOOSE.
>> I APPRECIATE THE MOTIVATION
TO POSTPONE BUT I GUESS I'M A
LITTLE UNCERTAIN WHEN WE SHOULD
POSTPONE IT TOO.
I MEAN THE DRAFTS ARE GOING TO
BE RELEASED THEN THERE'S GOING
TO BE AT LEAST FOUR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT SESSIONS AT THE
LIBRARY.
I ASSUME THERE'S GOING TO BE
OTHER MEANS TO PROVIDE PUBLIC
INPUT.
SO I DON'T KNOW AGAIN I'M I
DON'T FEEL LIKE I HAVE A TIME
IN MIND WHERE I WOULD WANT IT
TO COME BACK.
SO I THINK I'M GOING TO VOTE
AGAINST COUNCILOR.
I WOULD BE INCLINED IF WE ARE
POSTPONING THIS TO NOT DO IT TO
THE NEXT MEETING AFTER THE
PLAN.
I THINK MY INCLINATION IN TERMS
OF SUPPORTING A POSTPONEMENT
WOULD BE TO ALLOW A
CONVERSATION TO EXIST IN THE
CONTEXT OF THAT FIRST DRAFT AND
INTO WAY BACK IN POTENTIALLY IN
THE IN THE SECOND DRAFT IF WE
NEED TO TO PROVIDE DIRECTION
INTO THAT.
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT THIS
IS I UNDERSTAND THE DESIRE TO
DO THIS NOW IT IT IS IT
SPECIFYING WITH CERTAINTY ONE
ELEMENT BUT I THINK THIS ROOM
DEMONSTRATES SOMETHING TONIGHT
.
IT'S VERY DIFFERENT THAN WHAT
EXISTED IN THE PLANNING
COMMISSION MEETING LAST WEEK
WHICH WAS PACKED.
RIGHT.
WE HAD LIMITED PUBLIC COMMENT.
NOBODY IN SUPPORT OF THIS
RESOLUTION AND WE KNOW THAT THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT ARE EXISTING
IN THE PUBLIC SPHERE ARE
SUGGESTING YOU KNOW, SOME ARE
SUGGESTING THAT WE SHOULD HALT
THIS PROCESS ENTIRELY.
I I UNDERSTAND THE DESIRE TO
RESET AND SORT OF FRAME IT BACK
IN THE CONTEXT OF HOW A
PLANNING STAFF WAS DOING THAT.
>> AND HONESTLY, I THINK THAT
THERE'S AT SOME POINT THERE MAY
MAY NEED TO BE SOME SOME
FEEDBACK FROM US AS IS THE
ELECTED BODY BEFORE PLANNING
STAFF ACTUALLY FINALIZES THIS
PLAN.
BUT I DON'T I DON'T THINK THAT
THIS IS I DON'T ANTICIPATE THIS
IS GOING TO DO WHAT THE
SPONSORS HERE HOPE IT'S GOING
TO DO.
>> I THINK IT'S GOING TO JUST
MOVE THE BALL RIGHT.
THERE'S JUST GOING TO BE A NEW
REQUEST AND I DON'T I DON'T
ANTICIPATE THIS WORKING THE WAY
YOU HOPE FOR THE DISCUSSION THE
POSTPONEMENT ROLL-CALL VOTE
PLEASE START WITH COUNCIL 01
COUNTERMARCH 01 NO MARTELA NO
CUSTOMER IRE, NO CUSTOMER
ACCOUNTS, NO CUSTOMER BRIGS.
YES CUSTOMER CORNELL YEP.
>> NO CUSTOMER HARRISON NO
CUSTOMER WATSON NO CUSTOMER
MALIK NO CUSTOMER DENHA NO
MOTION FAILS FURTHER DISCUSSION
THE MAIN MOTION
HELLO.
>> INTERESTING.
OH I'M SORRY JUST JUST WASN'T
THAT LONG AGO THAT I WAS SAYING
LAST TIME.
OH YES THANK YOU SO ALL YOU DID
I.
OH OK I'M SORRY YOU'VE HEARD
YOU'VE HEARD A LOT ABOUT THE
ENGAGEMENT OVER AND ABOVE THE
STATEMENTED COMMENT PERIOD SO I
JUST WANTED TO SAY A WORD ABOUT
STATEMENTED COMMENT PERIODS
THAT I LEARNED WHEN I WAS ON
PARKS COMMISSION WHICH
CREATED A COMPREHENSIVE FIVE
YEAR PROCESS PLAN.
PARKS RECREATION AND OPEN
SPACES FOR STEWARDING PARK
RESOURCES WHICH ARE WELL
DIFFERENT THAN LAND USE MAKES
OUR CITY MORE ATTRACTIVE TO
RESIDENTS AND VISITORS AND CAN
STILL CONFER BENEFITS TO
CERTAIN NEIGHBORHOODS AND PARTS
OF THE CITY.
SO I LOOK BACK AT MY NOTES FROM
THE MOST RECENT DRAFTING OF THE
PLAN THAT WAS PRESENTED IN
TWENTY THREE AND IT CAME WITH A
SIX PAGE MEMO CONTAINING
RESIDENT COMMENTS AND CHANGES
IN THE DRAFT THAT WERE MADE AS
A RESULT THESE CHANGES WERE YOU
KNOW, ALL MADE MADE DURING THAT
60 DAY ISSUE MAYBE 30 DAYS
THEIR PUBLIC NOTICE PERIOD THAT
RESEMBLES THE ONE THAT WILL
BEGIN IN AUGUST FOR THE LAND
USE PLAN.
SO I THINK JUST TRULY UNFAIR TO
SAY THAT THIS PLAN IS A DONE
DEAL BECAUSE THE CITY HAS SHOWN
TIME AND AGAIN THAT
INCORPORATES FEEDBACK FROM
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT, FURTHER
DISCUSSION.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE A GREAT THING
GOING ON HERE IN ANN ARBOR AND
I LOVE OUR TOWN AND AND YOU
KNOW, WE ALL DO TOO.
>> BUT THE STATUS QUO DOES NOT
WORK FOR EVERYONE AND PEOPLE
WHO WORK HERE OFTEN CAN'T
AFFORD TO LIVE HERE AND PEOPLE
WHO LIVE HERE OFTEN CAN'T
AFFORD TO STAY AND THAT AND
HOUSING COST WHICH IS THE
RESULT OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND IS
AT THE CENTER OF THIS CHALLENGE
.
>> SUPPLY HAS BEEN KEPT LOW FOR
DECADES.
>> WE ALL WANT ANN ARBOR TO BE
AFFORDABLE, SUSTAINABLE AND
EQUITABLE.
>> WE IF WE CAN WE WANT TO
STABILIZE PRICES.
WELCOME NEW DIVERSE NEIGHBORS,
PARTICULARLY MIDDLE INCOME
EARNERS AND THE ONLY WAY TO DO
THIS IS TO INCREASE HOUSING
SUPPLY MUCH OF THIS INCREASE
SHOULD AND WILL BE DOWNTOWN AND
ON TRANSIT CORRIDORS AND SOME
WILL BE IN DETACHED HOME
NEIGHBORHOODS INTEGRATED INTO
THE EXISTING CONTEXT.
>> OUR GOAL DURING THAT ENTIRE
PROCESS IS TO FIND A BALANCE TO
FIND A BALANCE HONORING THE
PLACE THAT WE LOVE TODAY WHICH
IS GOING AND EVOLVING INTO A
CITY THAT WORKS FOR EVERYONE AS
WE KNOW AT THIS TABLE AND AS
MANY IN THE PUBLIC I HOPE ARE
LEARNING THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
IS EXTREMELY DIFFERENT FROM
ZONING.
>> IT IS A POLICY STATEMENT
OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND GOALS
AND GUIDES THE ZONING RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
IN OTHER WORDS, THE
COMPREHENSIVE USE PLAN DOES NOT
ENGAGE THE SPECIFIC CONTEXT
OF EACH NEIGHBORHOOD ZONING
DOES.
>> OF COURSE YOU ALL KNOW HERE
THIS TABLE AND IN THE PUBLIC
THAT THE COMPREHENSIVE USE
PLAN, THE ZONING ORDINANCE
ORIGINATE WITH THE PLANNING
COMMISSION WHICH IS A BOARD
OF COMMUNITY MEMBERS WHO HELP
ADMINISTER AND DEVELOP LAND USE
POLICY.
>> THE CITY COUNCIL IN THIS WE
ARE ABLE TO ACTUALLY AMEND
ZONING ORDINANCES BUT WE CANNOT
AMEND THE COMPREHENSIVE USE
PLAN.
IT'S THEIR DOCUMENT WE JUST
VOTED UP OR DOWN.
>> IT IS I THINK APPROPRIATE
THAT WE DO MAKE COMMENT ON THE
PLAN IN PROCESS.
WE ARE NOT INSTRUCTING ANYBODY
TO DO ANYTHING IN THIS CONTEXT
AND I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING
IMPORTANT.
THE THE RESOLUTION VERY
MINDFULLY SPEAKS IN TERMS
OF REQUESTS IT SPEAKS AND ALSO
IN TERMS OF THE THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT, THE CONSENSUS TO
DATE THAT CONSENSUS IS ONLY TO
DATE IT IS THE EVALUATION
OF THAT CONSENSUS IS ALWAYS
ONGOING.
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC CONTINUE
TO SPEAK UP TO BOTH US AND
PLANNING COMMISSION AND STAFF
AND THAT'S ALL RIGHT AND PROPER
.
>> BUT NEVERTHELESS WE SET A
MARKER FOR WHERE WE ARE TODAY
AND I THINK THAT'S APPROPRIATE
AND I THINK IT'S APPROPRIATE
BECAUSE THIS IS IN SOME
RESPECTS THIS ISN'T A THIS IS
INDEED A RESPONSE TO THE NATURE
OF THE PUBLIC CONVERSATION
PLANNING COMMISSION AS
ARTICULATED IN THE RESOLUTION
ENTERTAINED FORTY EIGHT FEET,
WHICH WAS A NOVEL INTRODUCTION
TO MY UNDERSTANDING.
>> LET'S NOT SOMETHING THAT WAS
GENERATED FROM THE BROADER
COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE.
>> IT'S IT'S MY HOPE THAT THIS
RESOLUTION RECALIBRATES THE
CONVERSATION ENABLES US TO TO
ACCOMPLISH ULTIMATELY A
CONSENSUS TO TO WORK TO MAKE
HOUSING IN OUR CITY WORK FOR
EVERYONE AND THAT'S THAT'S WHAT
WE HOPE TO DO TODAY.
>> FURTHER DISCUSSION ROLL-CALL
VOTE PLEASE START WITH COUNCIL
MEMBER CASSIANO GARTSIDE ONE
YES.
RETAILOR YES IT'S MORE IHR YES
ELSEWHERE ACKMANN NO CUSTOMER
BRIGS NO CUSTOMER KORNEL NO
CUSTOMER ISSS YES CUSTOMER
HARRISON YES CUSTOMER WATSON
YES.
>> CUSTOMER YES CUSTOMER DENHA
YES MOSHIN DO YOU HAVE THE
PLEASURE OF A CLOSED SESSION
TODAY.
>> NO THANK YOU.
MAY WE HAVE BEFORE THE CLERKS
ARE PART OF COMMUNICATIONS
PETITIONS AND REFERRALS MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THE CLERK'S
SUPPORT MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED
IT'S PROVED TO YOU HAVE
COMMUNICATION TODAY FROM OUR
CITY ATTORNEY.
>> HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO SEE YOU.
>> THAT'S IT.
WOOHOO!
>> IN THE ABSENCE OF PUBLIC
COMMENT OVERFLOW MAY HAVE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE MOVE
BY COUNCILMAN CORNELL SAY MY
COUNSELOR REDISH DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POES WE'RE ADJOURNED.
WELL HOW FAR IS IT